## Journal Pre-proof
**American Glaucoma Society-American Academy of Ophthalmology Position Statement on Nicotinamide Use for Glaucoma Neuroprotection**
Aakriti Garg Shukla, MD, MSc, George A. Cioffi, MD, Simon W.M. John, PhD, Qing Wang, MD, PhD, Jeffrey M. Liebmann, MD, on behalf of the American Glaucoma Society and American Academy of Ophthalmology
**PII:** S2589-4196(25)00007-9
**DOI:** [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ogla.2025.01.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ogla.2025.01.002)
**Reference:** OGLA 662
**To appear in:** OPHTHALMOLOGY GLAUCOMA
**Received Date:** 13 December 2024
**Revised Date:** 2 January 2025
**Accepted Date:** 7 January 2025
Please cite this article as: Shukla AG, Cioffi GA, John SWM, Wang Q, Liebmann JM, on behalf of the American Glaucoma Society and American Academy of Ophthalmology, American Glaucoma Society-American Academy of Ophthalmology Position Statement on Nicotinamide Use for Glaucoma Neuroprotection, *OPHTHALMOLOGY GLAUCOMA* (2025), doi: [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ogla.2025.01.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ogla.2025.01.002).
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2025 by the American Academy of Ophthalmology Published by Elsevier Inc.
## American Glaucoma Society-American Academy of Ophthalmology Position Statement on Nicotinamide Use for Glaucoma Neuroprotection
### Authors
Aakriti Garg Shukla, MD, MSc<sup>1,2</sup>
George A. Cioffi, MD<sup>1,2</sup>
Simon W.M. John, PhD<sup>1,2</sup>
Qing Wang, MD, PhD<sup>1,2</sup>
Jeffrey M. Liebmann, MD<sup>1,2</sup>
*on behalf of the American Glaucoma Society and American Academy of Ophthalmology*
### Affiliations
1. Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York, USA
2. Bernard and Shirlee Glaucoma Research Laboratory, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York, USA
### Keywords
glaucoma; neuroprotection; nicotinamide; liver injury
### Word Count
2,219
### Funding
Research to Prevent Blindness, New York, NY; The Glaucoma Foundation, New York, NY.
### Short Title
AGS-AAO Position Statement on Nicotinamide
### Corresponding Author
Aakriti Garg Shukla, MD, MSc
Leonard A. Lauder Associate Professor of Ophthalmology
Edward S. Harkness Eye Institute
Columbia University Irving Medical Center
622 West 168th Street, Box 200
Presbyterian Hospital Building, 18<sup>th</sup> Floor
NY, NY 10032
Email: ag2965@cumc.columbia.edu
## Glaucoma and Neuroprotection
Glaucoma is the most common neurodegenerative disease and the leading cause of irreversible blindness globally, with a projected worldwide prevalence expected to affect 111.8 million people by 2040.¹ While conventional intraocular pressure (IOP)-lowering therapy for glaucoma can effectively slow or halt the disease, many patients continue to experience optic nerve damage and visual field loss even when IOP reduction has been substantial. There is a strong unmet need for neuroprotective, IOP-independent agents that can both slow retinal ganglion cell damage (neuroprotection) and potentially heal damaged retinal ganglion cells (neurorecovery, neuroregeneration), as was identified in a 2022 American Glaucoma Society Position Paper and elsewhere.²⁻⁵
### Mitochondrial Targets in Glaucoma Neuroprotection
Recently, there has been interest in treating early mitochondrial abnormalities in retinal ganglion cells with neuroprotective therapies in the management of glaucoma.⁶⁻⁸ Mitochondrial and metabolic changes were found to predate neurodegeneration in the DBA/2J mouse model of glaucoma and an inducible model of ocular hypertension.⁶⁻⁸ Supplementation with oral nicotinamide to support metabolism resulted in 93% of eyes in the DBA/2J model not developing glaucoma at the highest tested dose.⁶⁻¹¹ Nicotinamide (also known as niacinamide) is an amide of niacin (also known as nicotinic acid). Both niacin and nicotinamide are forms of vitamin B3. For the purpose of this document, niacin explicitly refers to nicotinic acid. The beneficial effects of nicotinamide are hypothesized to be its actions in increasing the level of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD⁺), a coenzyme in many cellular oxidation-reduction reactions, a possible increase in blood flow, and other mechanisms.¹²
## Following laboratory studies
Data from pilot human clinical studies have provided encouraging results for the role of nicotinamide in glaucoma neuroprotection. A phase 2 randomized controlled trial in the United States of 32 individuals with open-angle glaucoma found that oral supplementation with 3 grams/day of nicotinamide and 3 grams/day of calcium pyruvate for 9 weeks led to an improvement of a median of 8 visual field test locations as compared with placebo. Consistent with this finding, a 12-week, crossover randomized clinical trial in Australia of 57 participants found improved inner retinal function as assessed by electroretinography with nicotinamide supplementation of 3 grams/day. These clinical studies' endpoints include functional findings detectable in a research setting, but do not consistently translate to visual recovery that is impactful to the patient. Aside from its potential role in glaucoma, nicotinamide has long been a nutritional additive and has been studied in other medical conditions, such as the prevention of dementia, inflammatory disease, skin cancer, diabetes, depression, and anxiety.
### Ongoing clinical trials on nicotinamide as a neuroprotective agent
Several ongoing clinical trials are investigating the role of nicotinamide as a therapeutic neuroprotective treatment for glaucoma globally, including in the United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Australia, Hong Kong, China, Korea, Italy, and other countries (clinicaltrials.gov identifiers: NCT05275738, NCT05405868, NCT05695027, NCT06078605, NCT06333236), with a cumulative target enrollment of over 1300 participants. Most trials prescribe nicotinamide 3 grams/day, while one prescribes nicotinamide riboside (300 mg/day) instead, and another.
## Systemic effects of nicotinamide
Includes pyruvate 1 gram/day in addition to nicotinamide. All trials except for the Swedish Nicotinamide Trial allow for the concurrent use of IOP-lowering agents. In the Swedish trial, untreated, newly diagnosed open-angle glaucoma patients do not receive IOP-lowering agents and are instead randomized to nicotinamide 3 grams/day vs. placebo.
The dosing of nicotinamide at 3 grams/day in the first human trials in glaucoma (US-based and Australia-based) was derived from laboratory work, which found that the lowest nicotinamide dose tested in mice (equivalent to 2.7 grams/day in a 60-kilogram human) resulted in 70% of eyes not having glaucomatous neurodegeneration. These proof-of-concept human trials’ encouraging results at a dose of 3 grams/day have motivated investigators to pursue subsequent, longitudinal clinical studies to use similar dosing. It is important to note that while the recommended daily intake of nicotinamide is approximately 20 milligrams/day, these trials prescribe substantially higher (150 times the recommended intake) doses.
### Systemic effects of nicotinamide
Of the more than 300 participants who have started using investigational medications (nicotinamide or placebo) in glaucoma clinical trials to date, there have been two known instances of drug-induced liver injury (DILI). DILI is a serious adverse event and has led to the termination of affected patients from studies. Non-serious adverse events have prompted the trial protocols to allow for reducing the nicotinamide dose (e.g., from 3 grams/day to 1-2 grams/day) when the medication is not well tolerated.
## DILI and Niacin Use
DILI is the most frequent cause of acute liver failure in Western countries and is estimated to occur in 14-19 cases per 100,000 persons. DILI ranges widely in severity, resulting in mild liver enzyme elevations, liver failure, the need for liver transplantation, or death. LiverTox, the National Institutes of Health-sponsored website on hepatotoxicity, includes more than 1200 agents, including prescription and over-the-counter medications, herbal products, nutritional supplements, metals, and toxins as potentially causative of liver injury.
Niacin, or nicotinic acid, is a form of vitamin B3 that differs from nicotinamide and has been associated with direct hepatotoxicity manifesting as serum enzyme elevations without other findings (seen in 20% of people), or acute hepatic necrosis, sinusoidal obstructions, acute fatty liver, and nodular regeneration. Hepatotoxicity from niacin is thought to be an intrinsic toxic reaction related to high serum levels of niacin that overwhelm the nicotinic acid receptors resulting in the flushing response associated with niacin.
Given the association between niacin and DILI, all clinical trials studying nicotinamide as a therapy for glaucoma have excluded participants with a history of liver disease. However, there had been no prior confirmed cases of severe DILI within the nicotinamide dosage range (3 grams/day or less) used in the ongoing glaucoma neuroprotection clinical trials. Doses of nicotinamide well above 3 grams/day may lead to hepatotoxicity, as was evidenced in a case report of a graduate student using 9 grams/day of nicotinamide for schizophrenia. However, a pooled analysis of 244 patients on 3-6 grams/day of niacin or nicotinamide, and a study of 55 patients on 1.2 grams/day of nicotinamide did not find an association with liver dysfunction.
Nicotinamide use can be associated with gastrointestinal discomfort, nausea, bloating.
## Cases of drug-induced liver injury in glaucoma neuroprotection trials
In this section, we describe the two cases of DILI occurring in glaucoma neuroprotection trials of nicotinamide.
### Case #1
Case #1 took place in the United States and involved a 73-year-old Caucasian woman with primary open-angle glaucoma. She had normal liver function values at baseline, no known underlying liver disease, and a normal body mass index. Aside from a low-dose statin, she did not take prescription medications with known hepatotoxic effects, and was on glucosamine, omega-3 fatty acids, and fiber as supplements aside from the study products.
She escalated her dose of study products from 1 gram/day to 3 grams/day over two weeks as per study protocol. After three weeks at this target dose, she experienced vomiting and was found to have significantly elevated liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1467 U/L (normal range: 10-40 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 860 U/L (normal range: 10-45 U/L)), leukocytosis, and an INR of 3.0 (normal range: 0.85-1.18 ratio).
Suspected DILI led to her hospitalization, where she was treated with intravenous N-acetylcysteine and stopped study products. Infectious or autoimmune hepatitis and biliary obstruction were ruled out. Her treatment assignment was
unmasked, and she was found to be in the nicotinamide and pyruvate arm. Upon discharge three days later, her liver enzyme levels had partially decreased, normalized within three weeks, and stayed normal 1 year later. Her remaining pills from both study products, nicotinamide and pyruvate, were counted, and were as expected in number, suggesting that the patient did not take more pills than recommended by the study. Her study products were sent for external mass spectrometry analysis, which found the expected components (nicotinamide and pyruvate) with negligible presence of niacin and no nicotinamide in the pyruvate samples. There was no evidence to suggest that impurities in the study products led to hepatotoxicity. Based on this case, the trial protocol was amended to include close monitoring of liver function tests: at baseline, 1 week after initiating study products, 2 months, 4 months, and every 4-6 months thereafter for the 20-month duration of the trial. Liver function testing is performed if participants exhibit gastrointestinal symptoms, icterus, dark urine, or any other sign of hepatic dysfunction. Participants are terminated from the study if they meet Hy’s law criteria to determine the risk for acute liver failure in the setting of DILI. The use of pyruvate did not appear to be related to DILI in this patient, based upon guidance from hepatology and the lack of prior evidence for liver dysfunction associated with this compound.
### Case #2
Case #2 occurred in Singapore and involved a 69-year-old Chinese woman enrolled in the Singapore Nicotinamide Trial. She had normal liver function values at baseline and, no known risk factors for drug-induced liver injury, but was underweight, with a body mass index of 15. She had been on 1.5 grams/day of study products for 6 weeks and 3 grams/day for 10 days. She was found to appear icteric and reported nausea, vomiting, rash, and itchiness and underwent urgent
## Conclusion
Approximately 74% of the United States population uses one or more dietary supplements. Given the irreversible nature of glaucoma and the poor tolerability of IOP-lowering therapies, patients often inquire about nutritional supplements as a complementary or alternative therapy to conventional treatments. While the cases we reviewed above were detected and traced to the use of nicotinamide in the setting of clinical trials, it is conceivable that numerous persons worldwide are using nicotinamide at high doses as a health supplement without oversight by physicians. Some of these individuals may have suffered from DILI, ranging from minor liver enzyme elevations to liver failure and other outcomes associated with higher-than-routine daily doses of nicotinamide. It can be surmised that most cases of modest liver dysfunction in the
## Nicotinamide Use in Glaucoma
The setting of self-initiated nicotinamide use is unreported because people self-discontinue the supplements due to gastrointestinal symptoms. Regardless of severity of presentation, these symptoms may not have been linked to nicotinamide use as patients often do not reveal their use of dietary supplements to their physicians, and likewise, physicians sometimes do not ask about such use. Additionally, physicians may not suspect nicotinamide to be the culprit, may not report it as the cause of hepatotoxicity, or treat the findings appropriately. Furthermore, the nature of regulation of the nutraceuticals industry in the United States may lead to varying amounts of active ingredient in the doses listed.
Based on laboratory and human studies, nicotinamide holds promise as a potential neuroprotective agent for glaucoma. However, its efficacy and safety continue to be investigated, and its optimal long-term dose is currently unknown. For instance, the dose used for short-term neuro-recovery may not be necessary for long-term neuroprotection.
### The American Glaucoma Society (AGS) and American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) Recommendations
The American Glaucoma Society (AGS) and American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) recommend the following guidelines for the use of nicotinamide:
1. Nicotinamide is not approved for glaucoma and its safety is unknown. If doses < 3 grams/day of nicotinamide are being considered by the patient or physician, collaboration with the primary care physician is necessary and periodic liver function testing should be performed.
2. Given the potential for drug-induced liver injury, the use of nicotinamide at high doses (≥ 3 grams/day) is not recommended outside the confines of clinical trials where liver function is closely monitored.
3. Patients should be advised of possible side effects of nicotinamide and urged to report them immediately to their primary care physician or emergency room, depending on the severity of presentation. If enrolled in a clinical trial, patients with symptoms should also report them to the study investigators. Investigators and/or affected patients should provide these data to the Food and Drug Administration Safety Reporting Portal (https://www.safetyreporting.hhs.gov/).
4. Patients with current or prior liver disease should not be offered nicotinamide supplementation.
5. While niacin is a form of vitamin B3 and nicotinamide is its amide derivative, niacin and nicotinamide are not interchangeable. 23 Niacin is not being tested as a neuroprotective agent in human glaucoma trials, and it is known to be hepatotoxic in high doses. 28, 29 Therefore, the AGS and Academy strongly recommend against the use of niacin in place of nicotinamide for glaucoma neuroprotection.