## Special Commentary: Balancing Benefits and Risks
### The Case for Retinal Images to Be Considered as Nonprotected Health Information for Research Purposes
**American Academy of Ophthalmology Board of Trustees**
The economic and societal costs of vision impairment and eye disease are significant and growing. Retinal images contain a wealth of clinical information and are used for detecting diseases at an early stage, monitoring disease progression, evaluating treatment effectiveness, identifying clinical endpoints, and guiding individual patient care patterns. Retinal images are derived from different methods, for example, fundus photography, posterior segment and optic nerve OCT, fluorescein angiography, OCT angiography, indocyanine green angiography, extended ophthalmoscopy, multifocal electroretinography, perimetry, and so on. For research purposes, collection and aggregation of de-identified retinal images have been pivotal in many areas to base advances in expanding access to high-quality specialty care to underserved populations; disease screening and surveillance, for example, artificial intelligence devices approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for screening of diabetic retinopathy, and deep learning algorithms to determine disease staging in retinopathy of prematurity. For the most common retinal disorders in the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated that 19.8 million adults had age-related macular degeneration in 2019 and that 9.6 million adults had diabetic retinopathy in 2021. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated the prevalence of glaucoma to be 3 million adults in the United States. For vision loss and blindness overall, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated that more than 7 million individuals had vision loss or blindness in their better-seeing eye. Research to slow or stop the progression of retinal eye disorders is important to the millions of Americans living with these potentially blinding diseases.
In the United States, the privacy rule of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA; 45 CFR Parts 160 and 164) sets standards and implementation specifications to protect the privacy of medical records and other individually identifiable health information (collectively referred to as protected health information) by designating that it may not be used or disclosed for the purposes of research unless the patient has signed an authorization or an institutional review board has approved a waiver for patient authorization or informed consent. The HIPAA privacy rule applies to health plans, health care clearinghouses, and those health care providers who conduct certain health care transactions electronically. The concern about whether retinal images are biometric identifiers has been raised at scientific conferences, and a 2010 National Institute of Standards and Technology Guide included retina scans as an example of a biometric image, although the current Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Guidance Regarding Methods for De-identification of Protected Health Information in Accordance with HIPAA Privacy Rule does not specifically include retinal images in the list of individual identifiers, but lists biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints, and full-face photographs and any comparable images.
To be considered a biometric identifier, this linkage depends on satisfaction of all 3 of these conditions: (1) the images are unique or distinguishing, (2) a naming data source exists that definitively ties the de-identified image to the corresponding patient, and (3) a mechanism exists that relates the de-identified image and the identified data source. The DHHS guidance stipulates that the ability to distinguish data is not sufficient to compromise patient privacy, and the lack of a readily available naming data source also means that success might be no more than random assignment of de-identified data and an individual.
In the public realm and on the Internet, retinal images have been conflated and confused with iris images, which are being used by airport screening programs and other circumstances, to authenticate individuals’ identities. Iris image analysis was developed specifically for the purposes of individual identification, rather than for disease evaluation. Iris images are considered biometric identifiers because these images can be linked to a data source that reveals the identity of individuals.
The purposes of this statement are to offer a balanced evaluation of this question of the use of retinal images in research and clinical applications and to review both the risks of patient re-identification and the benefits to patients and the public. The goal is to evaluate the balance of disclosure risk against the benefits gained by access to the data. This statement addresses de-identified retinal images in the setting of the research environment or in the use of
## Background
In the same way as a retinal scan potentially could be associated with an individual patient, based on unique characteristics, so could a head computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging scan. Thus, these images theoretically are able to be identifiable, for example, a reconstructed 3-dimensional image of the head, but no known databases are available that could associate the patient-identifying information with these specific image types. A feature that distinguishes between retinal and iris images is that iris images are stored and associated with personally identifiable information in an accessible databank. Thus, an available mechanism has been established and implemented that facilitates the linkage of iris images with individually identifiable information.
Based on the HIPAA privacy rule, in 45 C.F.R. §164.514(b), the Expert Determination method for de-identification is defined as follows:
1. A person with appropriate knowledge and experience with generally accepted statistical and scientific principles and methods for rendering information not individually identifiable:
   i. Applying such principles and methods, determines that the risk is very small that the information could be used, alone or in combination with other reasonably available information, by an anticipated recipient to identify an individual who is a subject of the information; and
   ii. Documents the methods and results of the analysis that justify such determination.
The DHHS guidance provides principles governing the consideration of risk of identification of a specific set of health information, based on the principles defined by the Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology. These principles are: (1) replicability, (2) data source availability, and (3) distinguishability. The DHHS cautions that these principles serve as a starting point, are not meant to be a definitive list, and advises experts to consider how data sources that are available to a recipient of health information could be used to identify an individual.
#### TABLE 1
**Principles and Assessment Used by the American Academy of Ophthalmology in the Determination of Identifiability of Retinal Images**
| Principle            | Description                                                                                                        | Assessment of Retinal Images                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|-|--|-|
| Replicability        | Prioritize health information features into levels of risk according to the chance it will occur consistently in relationship to the individual.          | Low: Results of retinal images can vary over time, given disease progression.                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Data source availability | Determine which external data sources contain the patients’ identifiers and the replicable features in the health information, as well as who is permitted access to the data source. | Low: No externally accessible data sources are known that contain the patients’ identifiers and linkages to their images outside of the health care environment. This makes it much lower risk than patient demographic features, because these appear in public records and are readily available. |
| Distinguishability    | Determine the extent to which the patient’s data can be distinguished in the health information.                   | Low: The retinal image alone would not enable unique description of an individual.                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Assess risk          | The greater the replicability, availability, and distinguishability of the health information, the greater the risk for the patient’s identification. | Low: The retinal image is not replicable independently, not disclosed in multiple data sources for which many people have access, and not very distinguishing.                                                                                                                    |
Adapted from United States Department of Health and Human Services.
## Conclusions
The American Academy of Ophthalmology concludes that the risk of re-identification with de-identified retinal images is low, based on principles guiding expert determinations of de-identified information under the HIPAA privacy rule. The real benefits to advancing scientific knowledge and innovation, addressing eye disease and treatment for individual patients, and accelerating approaches to address public health issues to improve population vision health warrant the collection and collation of retinal images for research and quality improvement purposes. To reduce risks of re-identification further, the Academy promotes the alignment of data use agreements that prohibit any unapproved uses of de-identified retinal imaging data, including any attempts to re-identify patients. The American Academy of Ophthalmology proposes that the federal government, state legislatures, research agencies, and other entities do not include retinal images as a biometric identifier based on this assessment of risks of re-identification as very small. Instead, the American Academy of Ophthalmology supports the promotion of data use agreements to restrict access and to safeguard retinal images from improper use. In this way, well-intentioned efforts to protect patient privacy can focus on biometrics like iris image analysis that carry a real risk of re-identification through commercially available scanners and databases. Otherwise, unnecessary and unwarranted labeling of retinal scans as biometric identifiers could stifle research based on sharing and collaboration of retinal images, thus slowing advances in the prevention and treatment of vision loss and disability for the millions of Americans with retinal disease. In summary, the American Academy of Ophthalmology recommends the following for appropriate aggregation and use of retinal images for research and use in training artificial intelligence for clinical applications:
1. Images do not include any patient name or identifying information.
2. No readily available data source exists that could link patient identifying information with an image.
3. Data use agreements specify a ban on any re-identification activities.
Approved by the American Academy of Ophthalmology Board of Trustees, June 22, 2024.
## Footnotes and Disclosures
Originally received: June 22, 2024.
Final revision: July 15, 2024.
Accepted: July 29, 2024.
Available online: . Manuscript no. OPHTHA-D-24-01257.
American Academy of Ophthalmology, San Francisco, California.
### Disclosures:
All authors have completed and submitted the ICMJE disclosures form.
The author(s) have made the following disclosure(s): No related financial interests for the Academy Board of Trustees.
**HUMAN SUBJECTS:**
No human subjects were included in this study. All research adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. The requirement for informed consent was waived because of the retrospective nature of the study.
No animal subjects were included in this study.
### Author Contributions:
- **Conception and design:** Board of Trustees
- **Analysis and interpretation:** Board of Trustees
- **Data collection:** Board of Trustees
- **Obtained funding:** N/A; Study was performed as part of the authors’ regular employment duties. No additional funding was provided.
- **Overall responsibility:** Board of Trustees
### Correspondence:
Flora Lum, MD, Vice President, Quality and Data Science, American Academy of Ophthalmology, 655 Beach Street, San Francisco, CA 94109.
E-mail: flum@aao.org.