## OBJECTIVES OF PREFERRED PRACTICE PATTERN GUIDELINES
As a service to its members and the public, the American Academy of Ophthalmology has developed a series of Preferred Practice Pattern guidelines that identify characteristics and components of quality eye care. Appendix 1 describes the core criteria of quality eye care.
The Preferred Practice Pattern guidelines are based on the best available scientific data as interpreted by panels of knowledgeable health professionals. In some instances, such as when results of carefully conducted clinical trials are available, the data are particularly persuasive and provide clear guidance. In other instances, the panels have to rely on their collective judgment and evaluation of available evidence.
These documents provide guidance for the pattern of practice, not for the care of a particular individual. While they should generally meet the needs of most patients, they cannot possibly best meet the needs of all patients. Adherence to these PPPs will not ensure a successful outcome in every situation. These practice patterns should not be deemed inclusive of all proper methods of care or exclusive of other methods of care reasonably directed at obtaining the best results. It may be necessary to approach different patients’ needs in different ways. The physician must make the ultimate judgment about the propriety of the care of a particular patient in light of all of the circumstances presented by that patient. The American Academy of Ophthalmology is available to assist members in resolving ethical dilemmas that arise in the course of ophthalmic practice.
Preferred Practice Pattern guidelines are not medical standards to be adhered to in all individual situations. The Academy specifically disclaims any and all liability for injury or other damages of any kind, from negligence or otherwise, for any and all claims that may arise out of the use of any recommendations or other information contained herein.
References to certain drugs, instruments, and other products are made for illustrative purposes only and are not intended to constitute an endorsement of such. Such material may include information on applications that are not considered community standard, that reflect indications not included in approved U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) labeling, or that are approved for use only in restricted research settings. The FDA has stated that it is the responsibility of the physician to determine the FDA status of each drug or device he or she wishes to use, and to use them with appropriate patient consent in compliance with applicable law.
Innovation in medicine is essential to ensure the future health of the American public, and the Academy encourages the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic methods that will improve eye care. It is essential to recognize that true medical excellence is achieved only when the patients’ needs are the foremost consideration.
All Preferred Practice Pattern guidelines are reviewed by their parent panel annually or earlier if developments warrant and updated accordingly. To ensure that all PPPs are current, each is valid for 5 years from the “approved by” date unless superseded by a revision. Preferred Practice Pattern guidelines are funded by the Academy without commercial support. Authors and reviewers of PPPs are volunteers and do not receive any financial compensation for their contributions to the documents. The PPPs are externally reviewed by experts and stakeholders, including consumer representatives, before publication. The PPPs are developed in compliance with the Council of Medical Specialty Societies’ Code for Interactions with Companies. The Academy has Relationship with Industry Procedures (available at [www.aao.org/about-preferred-practice-patterns](www.aao.org/about-preferred-practice-patterns)) to comply with the Code.
Appendix 2 contains the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD) codes for the disease entities that this PPP covers. The intended users of the Conjunctivitis PPP are ophthalmologists.
## METHODS AND KEY TO RATINGS
Preferred Practice Pattern guidelines should be clinically relevant and specific enough to provide useful information to practitioners. Where evidence exists to support a recommendation for care, the recommendation should be given an explicit rating that shows the strength of evidence. To accomplish these aims, methods from the Scottish Intercollegiate Guideline Network¹ (SIGN) and the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation² (GRADE) group are used. GRADE is a systematic approach to grading the strength of the total body of evidence that is available to support recommendations on a specific clinical management issue. Organizations that have adopted GRADE include SIGN, the World Health Organization, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and the American College of Physicians.³
- All studies used to form a recommendation for care are graded for strength of evidence individually, and that grade is listed with the study citation.
- To rate individual studies, a scale based on SIGN¹ is used. The definitions and levels of evidence to rate individual studies are as follows:
| Level | Explanation                                                                                               |
|-------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| I++   | High-quality meta-analyses, systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials (RCTs), or RCTs with a very low risk of bias |
| I+    | Well-conducted meta-analyses, systematic reviews of RCTs, or RCTs with a low risk of bias                |
| I-    | Meta-analyses, systematic reviews of RCTs, or RCTs with a high risk of bias                              |
| II++  | High-quality systematic reviews of case-control or cohort studies<br>High-quality case-control or cohort studies with a very low risk of confounding or bias and a high probability that the relationship is causal |
| II+   | Well-conducted case-control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding or bias and a moderate probability that the relationship is causal |
| II-   | Case-control or cohort studies with a high risk of confounding or bias and a significant risk that the relationship is not causal |
| III   | Nonanalytic studies (e.g., case reports, case series)                                                     |
- Recommendations for care are formed based on the body of the evidence. The body of evidence quality ratings are defined by GRADE² as follows:
| Quality Rating      | Explanation                                                                                               |
|---------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Good quality        | Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect                     |
| Moderate quality    | Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate |
| Insufficient quality| Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate<br>Any estimate of effect is very uncertain |
- Key recommendations for care are defined by GRADE² as follows:
| Recommendation Type     | Explanation                                                                                               |
|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Strong recommendation   | Used when the desirable effects of an intervention clearly outweigh the undesirable effects or clearly do not |
| Discretionary recommendation | Used when the trade-offs are less certain—either because of low-quality evidence or because evidence suggests that desirable and undesirable effects are closely balanced |
- The Highlighted Findings and Recommendations for Care section lists points determined by the PPP panel to be of particular importance to vision and quality of life outcomes.
- All recommendations for care in this PPP were rated using the system described above. Ratings are embedded throughout the PPP main text in italics.
- Literature searches to update the PPP were undertaken on March 3, 2022 and June 7, 2023 in the PubMed database. Complete details of the literature search are available at [www.aao.org/ppp](www.aao.org/ppp).
## Recommendations
- Recommendations are based on systematic reviews, as per the Institute of Medicine (Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust, 2011). In formulating the recommendations, the health benefits, side effects/harms/risks, and the balance of benefits and risks are reviewed and considered. Final decisions are arrived at through informal consensus techniques. If there are areas of disagreement, a vote will be conducted among the members of the guideline panel. If there are individuals with direct financial relationships in the area of disagreement, these individuals will refrain from the vote.
## HIGHLIGHTED FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CARE
Conjunctivitis rarely causes permanent visual loss or structural damage, but the economic impact of conjunctivitis is considerable and largely due to lost work or school time and the cost of medical visits, testing, and treatment.⁴ ⁵
Chronic and/or recalcitrant conjunctivitis may be indicative of an underlying malignancy such as sebaceous carcinoma, lymphoma, or squamous cell carcinoma; or an underlying inflammatory condition, such as mucous membrane pemphigoid; or a chronic infection such as chlamydia.
The ophthalmologist plays a critical role in breaking the chain of transmission of epidemic adenoviral conjunctivitis, primarily by educating the patient and family about proper hygiene. Infected individuals should be counseled to wash hands frequently, to use a separate towel and pillow, and to avoid close contact with others during the period of contagion, which is usually 10 to 14 days from onset.
Tonometers that are inadequately disinfected can transmit infection. Dilute bleach soak (sodium hypochlorite) at 1:10 concentration is an effective disinfectant for tonometers.⁶ ⁷ 70% isopropyl alcohol (e.g., alcohol wipes), 3% hydrogen peroxide, and ethyl alcohol are no longer recommended.⁷ Tonometers that utilize single-use disposable tips can circumvent the issue of sterilization.
Indiscriminate use of topical antibiotics or corticosteroids should be avoided. Viral conjunctivitis will not respond to antibacterial agents, and mild bacterial conjunctivitis is likely to be self-limited. For acute exacerbations of vernal conjunctivitis, topical corticosteroids are usually necessary to control severe symptoms and signs.⁸ ⁹ No evidence exists demonstrating the superiority of any topical antibiotic agent.¹⁰
Gonococcal conjunctivitis is a hyperacute, vision-threatening infectious condition that requires immediate systemic therapy. Single-use tubes of ophthalmic ointment containing 0.5% erythromycin are used as the standard prophylactic agent to prevent ophthalmia neonatorum.¹¹
Conjunctivitis can be associated with systemic diseases. Diagnosis of superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis may lead to further investigations that reveal a thyroid disorder. Diagnosis of floppy eyelid syndrome should prompt a sleep study to rule out sleep apnea.
Herpes zoster can cause conjunctivitis, keratitis, and ocular inflammation in multiple tissues of the eye. Herpes zoster vaccination is strongly recommended in patients 50 years or older and patients 19 years or older who are immunocompromised.¹²
## INTRODUCTION
### DISEASE DEFINITION
Conjunctivitis is an inflammation that affects the conjunctiva primarily.
### PATIENT POPULATION
The patient population includes individuals of all ages who present with symptoms and signs suggestive of conjunctivitis, such as red eye or discharge.
### CLINICAL OBJECTIVES
- Establish the diagnosis of conjunctivitis, differentiating it from other causes of red eye
- Identify the cause(s) of conjunctivitis
- Establish appropriate therapy
- Relieve discomfort and pain
- Prevent complications
- Prevent the spread of communicable diseases
- Educate and engage both the patient and the referring healthcare providers on conjunctivitis management
## BACKGROUND
Conjunctivitis, or inflammation of the conjunctiva, is a general term that refers to a diverse group of diseases/disorders that affect primarily the conjunctiva. Most varieties of conjunctivitis are self-limited, but some progress and may cause serious ocular and extraocular complications.
Conjunctivitis can be classified as noninfectious or infectious and as acute, chronic, or recurrent. Noninfectious types of conjunctivitis include allergic, mechanical/irritative/toxic, immune-mediated, and neoplastic, and these types may overlap. The causes of infectious conjunctivitis include viruses and bacteria.
It is important to differentiate between primary conjunctival disease and conditions in which conjunctival inflammation is secondary to systemic or ocular diseases. For example, dry eye and blepharitis are the most frequent causes of conjunctival inflammation, and the treatment for each of these entities should be directed at correcting the underlying problems. Systemic conditions such as atopy or acute infections such as gonorrhea may also cause conjunctival inflammation, and treatment of conjunctivitis must include addressing the underlying systemic disease.
This PPP addresses the following types of conjunctivitis that are either most common or are particularly important to detect and treat:
### Allergic
- Seasonal/perennial allergic conjunctivitis
- Vernal conjunctivitis
- Atopic conjunctivitis
### Mechanical/Irritative/Toxic
- Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis (SLK)
- Blepharoconjunctivitis
- Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eye)
- Rosacea conjunctivitis
- Contact lens–related keratoconjunctivitis
- Giant papillary conjunctivitis (GPC)
- Floppy eyelid syndrome
- Giant fornix syndrome
- Medication-induced/preservative-induced keratoconjunctivitis
- **Conjunctival chalasis**
- **Dupilumab-associated ocular surface disease**
### Immune-mediated
- Ocular mucous membrane pemphigoid (OMMP)
- Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)
- Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS)/toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN)
- Graves’ disease ophthalmopathy
- Vasculitis
### Neoplastic
- Sebaceous carcinoma
- Ocular surface squamous neoplasia
- Melanoma
- Conjunctival lymphoma
### Viral
- Adenoviral conjunctivitis
- Herpes simplex virus (HSV) conjunctivitis
- Varicella (herpes) zoster virus (VZV) conjunctivitis
- Molluscum contagiosum
- Measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR)
- Epstein-Barr virus
- Zika
- COVID-19 conjunctivitis
- Monkeypox
### Bacterial
- Bacterial conjunctivitis (including nongonococcal and gonococcal)
- Chlamydial conjunctivitis
- Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome
### Other
- Ligneous conjunctivitis
- Pediculosis palpebrarum (*Phthirus pubis*)
- Factitious conjunctivitis
- Mucus fishing syndrome
## PREVALENCE AND RISK FACTORS
Conjunctivitis is a diagnosis that encompasses a diverse group of diseases that occur worldwide and affect all ages, all social strata, and all genders. Although there are no reliable figures that document the incidence or prevalence of all forms of conjunctivitis, this condition has been cited as one of the most frequent causes of patient self-referral. Conjunctivitis infrequently causes permanent visual loss or structural damage, but the economic impact of the disease in terms of lost work and school time, cost of medical visits, diagnostic testing, and medication is considerable.
The risk factors for developing conjunctivitis depend on the etiology. The associated and predisposing factors for the types of conjunctivitis that are most common or most important to treat are listed in Table 1. Symptoms may be exacerbated by the coexistence of blepharitis, dry eye, or other causes of ocular surface inflammation.
## NATURAL HISTORY
The natural history of each type of conjunctivitis depends on its etiology. Table 1 lists the natural history for the types of conjunctivitis that are most common or most important to treat.
#### TABLE 1
**Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors For, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis**
| Type of Conjunctivitis | Clinical Signs | Associated/Predisposing Factors | Natural History | Potential Sequelae |
|-------------------------|---------------|---------------------------------|-----------------|--------------------|
| Allergic               |               |                                 |                 |                    |
| **Seasonal/perennial** | - Bilateral. Eyelid edema, periorbital hyperpigmentation (allergic shiners), conjunctival injection, chemosis, watery discharge, mild mucous discharge, papillary palpebral reaction. | - Environmental allergens (e.g., grasses, pollens)<br>- Climate factors (low latitude, high mean annual temperature, and low annual outdoor humidity)<sup>16</sup><br>- Outdoor air pollution secondary to fuel combustion, forest fires, dust storms, truck traffic, mine dumps and industrial parks, pre- and postnatal exposure to environmental tobacco smoke<sup>17–20</sup><br>- Exposure to dogs, cats, farm animals<sup>21</sup> | - Recurrent, often associated with allergic rhinitis, dry eye, meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD) with mucin hyperproduction<sup>22, 23</sup> | - Minimal, local |
| **Vernal**             | - Bilateral. Palpebral and limbal variants. Giant papillary hypertrophy of superior tarsal conjunctiva, bulbar conjunctival injection, conjunctival scarring, watery and stringy mucous discharge. Limbal Horner-Trantas dots, limbal "papillae," corneal epithelial erosions, corneal neovascularization and scarring, pseudogerontoxon, corneal plaque/shield ulcer. | - Hot, dry environments such as Central and West Africa; parts of India; Mexico; Central, North, and South America; the Middle East; Japan<sup>24</sup> and the Mediterranean region.<br>- May be associated with deficiencies of growth hormone, sex-hormone binding globulin, and dihydrotestosterone, or high levels of estrone<sup>25, 26</sup><br>- Environmental allergens for acute exacerbations.<br>- More common in males<sup>27</sup> | - Onset in childhood; chronic course with acute exacerbations during spring and summer. Gradual decrease in activity within 2 to 20 years.<br>- Vernal keratoconjunctivitis (VKC)-like disease noted in young adults without history of childhood allergic disease<sup>28</sup> | - Eyelid thickening; ptosis; conjunctival scarring (predominantly superior tarsal) and cicatrization; corneal neovascularization, thinning, ulceration, infection, visual loss; limbal stem cell deficiency; keratoconus; corticosteroid-induced cataract and glaucoma<sup>29</sup><br>- Adult VKC with diffuse subepithelial thickening of tarsal plate without giant papillae, lower rate of corneal shield ulcers (less common than in children) |
#### TABLE 1
TYPICAL CLINICAL SIGNS OF ASSOCIATED/PREDISPOSING FACTORS FOR, AND NATURAL HISTORY OF CONJUNCTIVITIS
| Type of Conjunctivitis         | Clinical Signs | Associated/Predisposing Factors | Natural History               | Potential Sequelae                                                                               |
|--------------------------------|----------------|---------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Atopic**                     | - Bilateral. Eczematous blepharitis; eyelid thickening, scarring; periorbital hyperpigmentation; Dennie-Morgan lines; lash loss; papillary hypertrophy of superior and inferior tarsal conjunctiva; conjunctival injection and scarring; watery and stringy mucoid discharge; boggy edema; punctate epithelial keratitis; corneal neovascularization, ulcers and scarring | - More common in females ages 30-50<br>- Genetic predisposition to atopy<br>- Environmental allergens and irritants in acute exacerbations | - Later (than vernal) onset; chronic course with acute exacerbations | - Eyelid thickening or tightening, loss of lashes; MGD; conjunctival scarring/cicatrization (includes inferior); corneal scarring, neovascularization, thinning, infection, ulceration; corneal cataract; visual loss; increased risk of retinal detachment, herpes simplex keratitis, limbal stem cell deficiency, keratoconus subcapsular cataract |
| **Mechanical/Irritative/Toxic** | **Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis (SLK):**<br>- Bilateral superior bulbar conjunctival injection, laxity, edema, and keratinization. Superior corneal and conjunctival punctate epitheliopathy, corneal filaments, superior tarsal conjunctival alterations, papillary reaction, limbal hypertrophy | - Frequently associated with dysthyroid states (20%-65%)<br>- Dry eye and meibomian gland dysfunction; ocular graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), contact lens use<br>- More common in females | - Subacute onset of symptoms, usually bilateral. May wax and wane for years. | - Superior conjunctival keratinization, pannus, filamentary keratitis, chemosis |
|                                | **Blepharoconjunctivitis:**<br>- Chronic with exacerbations. Anterior blepharitis affects the eyelid skin, base of the eyelashes, and the eyelash follicles. Posterior blepharitis causes MGD, tear film instability, concomitant dry eye, chalazia. Bilateral, can be asymmetric.<br>- See Blepharitis PPP for further details on adult and pediatric blepharitis. | - **Anterior:** staphylococcal, *Demodex*, seborrheic<br>- **Posterior:** MGD<br>- **Angular:** *Staphylococcus aureus, Moraxella lacunata* | - Chronic blepharitis with acute exacerbation of conjunctival injection. May have a history of recurrent chalazia. | - Chronic blepharitis, conjunctivitis, keratitis, corneal neovascularization, ulceration, thinning, scarring, perforation |
|                                | **Keratoconjunctivitis sicca:**<br>- (See Dry Eye PPP.) |                                 |                                |                                                                                                 |
#### TABLE 1
**TYPICAL CLINICAL SIGNS OF ASSOCIATED/PREDISPOSING FACTORS FOR, AND NATURAL HISTORY OF CONJUNCTIVITIS**
| Type of Conjunctivitis                  | Clinical Signs                                                                                                                                                 | Associated/Predisposing Factors                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Natural History                                             | Potential Sequelae                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Rosacea conjunctivitis                  | - Bilateral chronic blepharitis, eyelid margin telangiectasis, meibomian gland inspissation with excessive sebum secretion, conjunctival injection, evaporative dry eye, chalazia, corneal neovascularization, stromal scarring<br>- Inferior involvement | - Eyelid margin telangiectasias, MGD, blepharitis, conjunctival hyperemia, injection, pannus (see Blepharitis PPP)<br>- Ocular involvement is present in about 75% of rosacea patients. | - Chronic inflammatory conditions with episodic flares     | - Evaporative dry eye, corneal neovascularization, stromal scarring, ulceration, and perforation. Can be associated with acne rosacea with characteristic malar rash, facial erythema, telangiectasias, papules, pustules, prominent sebaceous glands, rhinophyma. |
| Contact lens–related keratoconjunctivitis | - Ranges from mild to diffuse conjunctival injection, focal or diffuse corneal neovascularization, peripheral or circumferential corneal neovascularization, focal or diffuse superficial punctate keratopathy. Papillary hypertrophy of tarsal conjunctivitis is variable. May result in limbal and corneal edema. | - Occurs in association with contact lens wear as reaction to mechanical irritation, chronic hypoxia, or preservatives<br>- Can be related to duration of contact lens wear and hygiene | - Subacute to acute onset of symptoms. May take months or longer to resolve with treatment and withdrawal of contact lenses | - Corneal neovascularization; superior epitheliopathy and corneal scarring; limbal stem cell deficiency; may progress centrally into the pupillary area |
| Giant papillary conjunctivitis (GPC)    | - Laterality associated with contact lens wear pattern or other inciting pathology. Papillary hypertrophy of superior tarsal conjunctiva (often localized over inciting pathology), mucoid discharge. Papillae with white fibrotic centers can be seen in patients with long-standing disease. In severe cases: eyelid swelling, ptosis, shield ulcer | - Contact lens wear (risk factors include soft contact lenses, infrequent lens replacement, prolonged wearing time, poor lens hygiene, allergenic contact lens solutions, high water content, or poor contact lens fit)<br>- Also occurs with irritation from exposed sutures and prostheses | - Chronic gradual increase in symptoms and signs with contact lens wear, exposed corneal or scleral sutures, ocular prosthesis | - Tarsal scarring, ptosis, corneal abrasion/erosions |
#### TABLE 1
**Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors For, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis**
| Type of Conjunctivitis                         | Clinical Signs                                                                                          | Associated/Predisposing Factors                                                                                                                   | Natural History                                                                                                                                                         | Potential Sequelae                                                                                                                |
|------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Floppy eyelid syndrome**                     | - Upper eyelid edema; upper eyelid easily everted, sometimes by simple elevation or lifting of eyelid. <br> - Horizontal lid laxity; diffuse papillary reaction of superior tarsal conjunctiva; punctate epithelial keratopathy; pannus; mild discharge. <br> - Bilateral, often asymmetric                                                                                      | - Obesity, sleep apnea, upper-eyelid laxity, upper-eyelid excursion over lower eyelid (eyelid imbrication), thyroid disease (commonly Hashimoto's thyroiditis). <br> - Increased risk of keratoconus.                                                                                            | - Chronic ocular irritation due to nocturnal eyelid ectropion causing upper tarsal conjunctiva to come in contact with bedding.                                        | - Punctate epithelial keratitis; corneal neovascularization, ulceration, and scarring.                                           |
| **Giant fornix syndrome**                      | - Enlarged superior fornix with coagulum of mucopurulent material, ptosis.                                                                 | - Elderly women (eighth to tenth decade), upper-eyelid ptosis with large superior fornix.<sup>42, 43</sup>                                                                               | - Chronic mucopurulent conjunctivitis that waxes and wanes with typical short courses of topical antibiotic therapy.                                                   | - Ptosis, superior hyperemia, chronic conjunctivitis, corneal neovascularization and perforation.<sup>44</sup>                  |
| **Medication-induced/preservative-induced keratoconjunctivitis** | - Laterality based on drug use. <br> - Conjunctival injection, punctal edema, inferior fornix and bulbar conjunctival follicles, keratitis (especially inferonasal) including pseudodendrite. <br> - Distinctive signs: contact dermatitis of eyelids with erythema, scaling in some cases.                                         | - Topical glaucoma medications, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), antibiotics, antivirals, others; may be associated with preservatives in all eye medications. <br> - Most common with multiple eye medications and/or frequent dosing. <br> - Topical anesthetic abuse.                                                          | - Gradual worsening with continued use.                                                                                                                               | - Corneal epithelial erosion, persistent epithelial defect, corneal ulceration, pannus, corneal and conjunctival scarring, symblepharon, punctal occlusion, limbal stem cell deficiency. |
| **Conjunctival chalasis**                      | - Redundant conjunctiva, eyelid margin overhang, may occlude the inferior puncta.                                                           | - Previous eye surgery. <br> - Dry eye. <br> - Redundant conjunctiva.                                                                                                     | - Chronic in nature, may follow previous chemosis.                                                                                                                     | - Chronic irritation, dry eye keratitis, epiphora.                                                                              |
| **Dupilumab-associated ocular surface disease**| - Bilateral conjunctival and limbal injection, watery or mucous discharge. <br> - Follicular, papillary, and cicatrizing conjunctival changes have been noted.                                              | - Dupilumab use. <br> - Severe atopic dermatitis, a history of atopic conjunctivitis and low serum levels of dupilumab.                                                             | - Typically mild to moderate in severity, presents within several weeks to months of initiation of dupilumab treatment, limited to dupilumab.                          | - Often manageable with treatment, and most resolve while continuing treatment. <br> - Medication discontinuation and even dose frequency. |
#### TABLE 1
**Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors for, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis**
| Type of Conjunctivitis      | Clinical Signs                                                                                                                                     | Associated/Predisposing Factors                                                                                                             | Natural History                                                                          | Potential Sequelae                                                                                                                                                            |
|-----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Immune mediated**         |                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Ocular mucous membrane pemphigoid (OMMP) | - Bilateral, often asymmetric. Bulbar conjunctival injection, papillary conjunctivitis, conjunctival subepithelial fibrosis and keratinization, conjunctival scarring beginning in the fornices, punctal stenosis and keratinization, progressive conjunctival shrinkage, symblepharon, entropion, trichiasis, corneal ulcers/perforation, neovascularization, and scarring | - Unknown (genetic predisposition may exist)<br>- More common in women, onset generally over age 60<br>- Topical drugs may produce OMMP-like disease, with a spectrum of severity ranging from self-limited to progressive disease indistinguishable from OMMP. Associated drugs include pilocarpine and timolol.<br>- Cicatrizing conjunctivitis appearing similar to OMMP can be associated with other disorders including atopic disease and underlying neoplasms, such as paraneoplastic pemphigus and paraneoplastic lichens planus. | - Onset with goblet cell loss and mucin deficiency.<br>- Progressive chronic course, sometimes with remissions and exacerbations. More common in females | - Conjunctival scarring and shrinkage with forniceal foreshortening; ankyloblepharon, symblepharon; trichiasis; corneal scarring, neovascularization, ulceration, perforation; ocular surface keratinization; bacterial conjunctivitis; cicatricial eyelid changes; severe tear deficiency; severe vision loss. May involve mucous membranes of the oral cavity, nasopharynx, larynx, esophagus, genitourinary tract, and anus. |
| Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)  | - Bilateral. Conjunctival injection, chemosis, pseudomembranous conjunctivitis, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis, cicatricial eyelid disease, episcleritis, corneal epithelial sloughing, limbal stem cell failure, calcareous corneal degeneration; rare intraocular involvement | - Patients who have undergone allogeneic stem cell transplantation                                                                             | - Can involve multiple tissues including skin, liver, gastrointestinal system, lung, and eye. Graft-versus-host disease may follow acutely within the first 3 months following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, but ocular disease is more common in the chronic phase | - Subconjunctival fibrosis; symblepharon; lacrimal gland involvement; keratoconjunctivitis sicca; cicatricial eyelid disease. Less commonly limbal stem cell deficiency, corneal scarring, or intraocular involvement |
#### TABLE 1
**Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors for, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis**
| Type of Conjunctivitis                                  | Clinical Signs                                                                                                                                                                                | Associated/Predisposing Factors                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Natural History                                                                                                                         | Potential Sequelae                                                                                                                                                                |
|---------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS)/toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) | - Bilateral, potentially asymmetric. <br> - Bulbar conjunctival injection, membranes, conjunctival subepithelial fibrosis and keratinization, conjunctival scarring, punctual stenosis and keratinization, progressive conjunctival shrinkage, symblepharon, entropion, trichiasis, corneal ulcers/perforation, neovascularization, and scarring | - Genetic predisposition<sup>53</sup> <br> - Prior infection (e.g., herpes simplex virus (HSV), mumps, mycoplasma pneumoniae) <br> - Systemic medications (e.g., sulfonamides, barbiturates, or phenytoin) produce inflammation and cicatricial changes of the various mucous membranes of the body including the bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva | - Acute episode of mucocutaneous reaction with epidermal necrosis and may involve the various mucous membranes including the gastrointestinal system, lung and eye following the systemic use of sensitizing medication or infectious agents <br> - Often single episode with avoidance of offending agent <br> - May have chronic inflammation | - Conjunctival scarring and shrinkage with goblet cell loss and mucin deficiency; symblepharon; trichiasis; corneal scarring; neovascularization; ulceration; limbal stem cell deficiency; ocular surface and lid keratinization; bacterial conjunctivitis; cicatricial eyelid changes; severe tear deficiency; severe vision loss |
| Vasculitis                                             | - Unilateral or bilateral. <br> - Conjunctivitis,<sup>54</sup> conjunctival nodules,<sup>55</sup> or granuloma, symblepharon and/or cicatrization,<sup>56</sup> proptosis, restrictive myopathy, episcleritis, necrotizing scleritis,<sup>57</sup> peripheral ulcerative keratitis,<sup>58</sup> keratic precipitates, corneal ulcers,<sup>59</sup> iris nodules, trabecular meshwork nodules, peripheral anterior synechiae,<sup>60</sup> uveitis, choroidal granulomas, vitreous opacities, optic disc swelling<sup>61</sup>   | - Sarcoidosis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (granulomatosis with polyangiitis), Kawasaki disease, microscopic polyangiitis, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss syndrome), reactive arthritis, relapsing polychondritis, vasculitis secondary to infection, drug-induced vasculitis (methamphetamine, intravenous immunoglobulins, opioids, hydralazine, antibiotics, anti–leukotrienes),<sup>62</sup> or vasculitis associated with malignancies | - Sarcoidosis (bimodal age of presentation, with the highest incidence reported between ages 20 and 39)<sup>63</sup>, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, Kawasaki disease (primarily affects children; fever of 5 days or more; red, swollen tongue [“strawberry tongue”]; cervical lymphadenopathy; swollen, red skin on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet; polymorphous rash; irritability), linear IgA disease, mucous membrane pemphigoid | - Often involves multiple vessels, including the lungs, lymph nodes, kidneys, skin, nervous system <br> - Coronary artery aneurysm is a lethal complication of Kawasaki disease <br> - Kidney failure |
#### TABLE 1
**Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors for, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis**
| Type of Conjunctivitis            | Clinical Signs                                                                                           | Associated/Predisposing Factors                                                                                          | Natural History                                                                                      | Potential Sequelae                                                                                                         |
|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Neoplastic**                    |                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                          |
| Sebaceous carcinoma                | - Unilateral. Intense bulbar conjunctival infection, conjunctival scarring. May have a mucopurulent discharge. Corneal epithelial invasion may occur <br> - Eyelids may exhibit a hard nodular, nonmobile mass of the tarsal plate with yellowish discoloration; may appear as a subconjunctival, multilobulated yellow mass, may resemble a chalazion, may be chronic | - Unknown (rarely follows radiation therapy) <br> - Often history of multiple chalazion excisions                      | - Chronic/recurrent nature <br> - Occurs in fifth to ninth decades of life with fairly rapid progression <br> - Inflammation may be chronic and mistreated as an unresponsive blepharoconjunctivitis | - Orbital invasion, regional or distant metastases                                                                      |
| Ocular surface squamous neoplasia | - Conjunctival hyperemia, papillomatous or sessile nodules, may be leukoplakic or gelatinous <br> - Palpebral area, limbal location, sentinel vessel | - Associated with human papillomavirus (HPV); associated with significant exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light; long-standing chronic inflammation may be associated <br> - HIV patients <br> - Smoking <br> - Xeroderma pigmentosum            | - Inflammation may be chronic and mistreated as an unresponsive blepharoconjunctivitis                                   | - Conjunctival hyperemia, carcinoma in situ, or ocular surface squamous neoplasia, which can be locally invasive with regional metastases |
| Melanoma                          | - Painless, flat or nodular, brown or fleshy-pink lesion on the bulbar or palpebral conjunctiva or caruncle. Enlargement of the lesion, blood vessels or thickening, often trigger an office visit | - Significant UV exposure, previous history of melanoma, previous primary acquired melanosis or Nevus of Ota <br> - Fair skin <br> - Xeroderma pigmentosum | - Tends to spread to other adnexal structures and metastasize                                        | - Pigmented or nonpigmented lesion, invasive regional metastases, history of previous melanoma, primary may not be conjunctiva |
#### TABLE 1
**Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors For, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis**
| Type of Conjunctivitis | Clinical Signs | Associated/Predisposing Factors | Natural History | Potential Sequelae |
|-------------------------|---------------|---------------------------------|-----------------|---------------------|
| **Conjunctival lymphoma** | - Unilateral, painless, pink lesion with indolent fleshy, “salmon patch” conjunctival swelling on the superior or inferior conjunctiva.<sup>66</sup> Often presents with chronic palpebral or bulbar follicles. Most mobile and nonlobulated. Can have intrinsic vessels. | - Host immune deficiency, autoimmune conditions (Sjogren’s syndrome, Hashimoto’s, IgG4-related disease), genetic mutations, chronic infections (Helicobacter pylori, hepatitis C, and chlamydia)<sup>67</sup> | - Up to 20% with primary conjunctival lymphoma develop systemic disease<br>- Higher risk with location (fornix/mild bulbar) and increasing number of discrete tumors<sup>66</sup> | - Systemic involvement arising from conjunctival lymphoma is rare but varies based on lymphoma subtype |
| **Viral** | **Adenoviral**<br>- Abrupt onset. Unilateral or bilateral (often sequentially bilateral). Varies in severity. Bulbar conjunctival injection, watery discharge, follicular reaction of inferior tarsal conjunctiva, chemosis, eyelid swelling, erythema, and can resemble orbital cellulitis on exam.<br>- Distinctive signs: preauricular lymphadenopathy, petechial and subconjunctival hemorrhage, corneal epithelial defect, multifocal epithelial punctate keratitis evolving to anterior stromal keratitis, membrane/pseudomembrane formation, eyelid ecchymosis | - Exposure to infected individual (especially in school setting), concurrent upper respiratory infection, recent ocular testing | - Self-limited, with improvement of symptoms and signs within 5 to 14 days | - Mild cases: none.<br>- Severe cases: conjunctival/subtarsal scarring, symblepharon, keratitis and dry eye, subepithelial corneal infiltrates from epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC), corneal scarring, lacrimal stenosis<br>- Pseudomembranes associated with higher rate of severe sequelae<sup>68</sup> |
#### TABLE 1 – Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors for, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis
| Type of Conjunctivitis       | Clinical Signs                                                                                                                                | Associated/Predisposing Factors                                                                                     | Natural History                                                             | Potential Sequelae                                                                                                                             |
|------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Herpes simplex virus (HSV)** | - Usually unilateral. Can be bilateral, especially in atopic, pediatric, or immunocompromised patients.<br>- Bulbar conjunctival injection, watery discharge, mild follicular reaction of conjunctiva. May have palpable preauricular node.<br>- Distinctive signs: vesicular rash or ulceration of eyelids, pleomorphic or excavated dendritic epithelial keratitis of cornea. Ulceration of the conjunctiva. | - Prior infection with HSV; trigger for reactivation may include stress, other acute viral or febrile illnesses, ultraviolet exposure, surgery, or trauma.<br>- Primary HSV infection: exposure to infected individual. | - Usually subsides without treatment within 4 to 7 days unless complications occur. | - Blepharitis, epithelial keratitis, corneal edema, endotheliitis, stromal keratitis, neovascularization, scarring, thinning, perforation, uveitis, trabeculitis, retinitis. |
| **Varicella (herpes) zoster virus (VZV)** | - Usually unilateral. Bulbar conjunctival injection, watery discharge, mild follicular reaction of conjunctiva. May have palpable preauricular node. Typically, punctate keratitis in primary disease; punctate or pseudodendritic keratitis in recurrent disease.<br>- Distinctive signs: vesicular dermatomal rash or ulceration of eyelids (often with severe pain), pleomorphic or nonexcavated pseudodendritic epithelial keratitis of cornea. | - Acute chicken pox, exposure to an individual with active chicken pox or recurrent VZV (shingles). | - Primary infection (chicken pox), as well as conjunctivitis from recurrent infection, usually subsides in a few days. Vesicles can form at the limbus, especially in primary infection. | - Necrosis and scarring from vesicles on the eyelid margins, conjunctiva, and in the corneal stroma in primary disease in children. Conjunctival scarring from secondary infection can lead to cicatricial ectropion. In recurrent disease, keratitis of the epithelium or stroma with subsequent scarring and late corneal anesthesia or dry eye, uveitis, retinitis. |
#### TABLE 1
**Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors for, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis**
| Type of Conjunctivitis  | Clinical Signs                                                                                                          | Associated/Predisposing Factors                                                                                          | Natural History                                                                                                                                                  | Potential Sequelae                                                                                                   |
|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Molluscum contagiosum   | - Typically unilateral. Mild to severe follicular reaction, punctate epithelial keratitis. May have corneal pannus, especially if long-standing<br>- Distinctive signs: single or multiple shiny, dome-shaped umbilicated lesion(s) of the eyelid skin or margin<br>- Pruritis | - Predominantly older children and young adults. Immunocompromised state (e.g., HIV) may predispose to multiple and/or large molluscum periocular lesions<br>- Associated with chronic follicular conjunctivitis | - Chronic conjunctivitis is associated with eyelid lesions, which can spontaneously resolve or persist for months to years                             | - Conjunctival scarring, epithelial keratitis, pannus; less commonly, subepithelial infiltrates/haze/scar, occlusion of the puncta, follicular conjunctivitis |
| Measles (rubeola)       | - Bilateral conjunctivitis<sup>71</sup> (bulbar/tarsal hyperemia), mucous secretion, epithelial keratitis (punctate, round defects, filaments, target shaped)<br>- Subconjunctival hemorrhages, subepithelial<sup>71</sup> corneal lesions | - Unvaccinated individuals<br>- Both rash and conjunctivitis are caused by immune-mediated clearance of measles virus-infected cells and may be absent in immunodeficient patients | - Fever and maculopapular rash followed by cough, coryza (or rhinitis) and/or conjunctivitis<br>- While conjunctivitis develops at the prodromal phase, keratitis (photophobia) may develop before the development of rash | - Blindness from corneal scarring in vitamin A-deficient children<sup>75</sup><br>- Choroiditis, extraocular muscle palsy, optic neuritis               |
| Mumps                   | - Bilateral follicular conjunctivitis, chemosis, episcleritis, dacryoadenitis, keratitis, scleritis, anterior uveitis<sup>73</sup> | - Unvaccinated individuals                                                                                               | - Fever, bilateral parotid gland swelling, headache, nausea, vomiting<br>- Conjunctivitis/keratitis follows parotid gland involvement                          | - Choroiditis, extraocular muscle palsy, optic neuritis                                                             |
| Rubella                 | - Follicular conjunctivitis, palpebral > bulbar hyperemia, epithelial keratitis, corneal erosions<sup>74</sup>            | - Unvaccinated individuals                                                                                               | - Mild fever, rash, and lymphadenopathy<br>- Ocular involvement often follows rash                                        | - Keratitis often resolves in 1 week without sequelae                                                               |
######## TABLE 1: Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors for, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis
| Type of Conjunctivitis                             | Clinical Signs                                                                                         | Associated/Predisposing Factors                                                                                                                                                                            | Natural History                                                    | Potential Sequelae                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|---------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)                          | - Follicular conjunctivitis, typically unilateral, can have ipsilateral lymphadenopathy                | - Follicular conjunctivitis most common ocular disease during acute EBV infection                                                                                                                        | - Often self-limiting disease                                      | - Dry eye syndrome, dacryoadenitis, episcleritis, keratitis, uveitis, choroiditis, retinitis, retinal vasculitis, papillitis, and ophthalmoplegia78                                                                           |
|                                                   | - Can present with hemorrhagic conjunctivitis: subconjunctival hemorrhage, periorbital edema76         | - Other major causes of nonnodular acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis are enterovirus 70 and coxsackievirus A24                                                                                            | - Can present as oculoglandular syndrome                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|                                                   | - Conjunctival nodule is uncommon finding                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|                                                   | - Systemic signs: generalized fatigue, fever, pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy, and splenomegaly           |                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Zika virus                                        | - Nonpurulent conjunctivitis most common79, 81                                                         | - Transmission via Aedes mosquito species                                                                                                                                                                 | - Symptoms last from 3 to 7 days                                  | - Retinal involvement (retinal pigment epithelium disruption, chorioretinal atrophy, retinal hemorrhaging and mottling), optic neuritis, iris coloboma, lens subluxation, optic nerve hyperplasia                              |
|                                                   | - Bilateral nongranulomatous hypertensive iridocyclitis, maculopathy                                   | - Sexual, perinatal, and blood transfusion transmission possible                                                                                                                                          | - Ocular signs seem to be more significant in congenital disease80 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|                                                   | - Systemic signs: fever, maculopapular rash, headache, myalgia/arthralgia, and possibly Guillain-Barré syndrome | - Risk factors include infection in first trimester and smaller cephalic diameter at birth80                                                                                                               | - Conjunctivitis more common in acute Zika disease (versus congenital), less common in pregnant women with Zika |                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)/Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) | - Unilateral more than bilateral conjunctival injection82                                              | - SARS-CoV-2 exposure, unprotected eye exposure, significant travel history, or respiratory symptoms.                                                                                                      | - Usually occurs early in disease, mild inflammation with disappearance of symptoms within a few days of treatment85 | - Conjunctival symptoms appear self-limited with variable duration (5–21 days)                                                                                                       |
|                                                   | - Follicular reaction typical. May have chemosis, watery discharge, superficial keratitis, pseudomembranes83, 84 | - Relatively low incidence/prevalence compared with other systemic manifestations, more common in children84                                                                                              | - Typically, no effect on visual acuity and no short-term complications                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                | - Isolated or associated with systemic symptoms                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
#### TABLE 1: Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis
| Type of Conjunctivitis   | Clinical Signs                                                                                  | Associated/Predisposing Factors                                                                                                                                                                    | Natural History                                         | Potential Sequelae                                             |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Mpox**                | - Injection, discharge, conjunctival ulcers, disseminated blistering or papular conjunctival lesions, follicular reaction, pseudomembranous/subconjunctival nodules. <br> - May have vesicular rash of periorbital/orbital areas and eyelid involvement.   | - Immunocompromised and unvaccinated people, children more susceptible to conjunctivitis. <br> - Increased rate of being bedridden with conjunctivitis.                                                                             | - Typically mild, self-limited disease. <br> - Conjunctiva most affected ocular site. | - Corneal pitting, ulceration/keratitis, and scarring. <br> - Can lead to vision loss. |
| **Bacterial**            |                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                        |                                                                |
| Nongonococcal            | - Unilateral or bilateral. Bulbar conjunctival injection, purulent or mucopurulent discharge. <br> - See age stratification of associated/predisposing factors adjacent. | - Neonate: Vaginal delivery by infected mother, inadequate prenatal care. <br> - Infant: Nasolacrimal duct obstruction, concomitant bacterial otitis media or pharyngitis, exposure to infected individual. <br> - Child: Contact with infected individual; concomitant bacterial otitis media, sinusitis, or pharyngitis; nasopharyngeal bacterial colonization. <br> - Adult: Contact with infected individual, unhygienic living conditions, infection or abnormality of adnexal structure, eyelid malposition, severe tear deficiency, immunosuppression, trauma. | - Mild: Self-limited in adults. May progress to complications in children. <br> - Severe: May persist without treatment, rarely hyperacute. | - Rare, but possibly corneal infection, preseptal cellulitis. <br> - Corneal infection; may be associated with pharyngitis, otitis media, meningitis. |
#### TABLE 1: Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors For, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis
| Type of Conjunctivitis | Clinical Signs | Associated/Predisposing Factors | Natural History | Potential Sequelae |
|------------------------|---------------|---------------------------------|-----------------|--------------------|
| **Gonococcal**         | - Unilateral or bilateral. Marked eyelid edema, bulbar conjunctival injection, significant purulent discharge, preauricular lymphadenopathy  <br> - Important sign to detect: corneal infiltrate or ulcer, which often begins superiorly, may lead to corneal perforation  <br> - See age stratification of associated/predisposing factors | - Oculogenital spread; consider sexual abuse in children  <br> - Immunosuppression | - Neonate: Manifests within 1 to 7 days after birth, later if a topical antibiotic was used. Rapid evolution to severe, purulent conjunctivitis  <br> - Adult: Rapid development of severe hyperpurulent conjunctivitis | - Neonate: Corneal infection, corneal scarring, corneal perforation, septicemia with arthritis, meningitis  <br> - Adult: Corneal infection, corneal scarring, corneal perforation, urethritis, pelvic inflammatory disease, septicemia, arthritis |
| **Chlamydial (inclusion)** | - Neonate/infant: Unilateral or bilateral. Eyelid edema, bulbar conjunctival injection, discharge may be purulent, mucopurulent, or blood-stained; *no follicles*  <br> - Adult: Unilateral or bilateral. Follicular conjunctivitis, chemosis, papillary hypertrophy, corneal pannus, limbal follicles, superficial keratitis, subepithelial infiltrates. Distinctive sign: follicles on the bulbar conjunctiva and semilunar fold | - Sexually transmitted  <br> - Caused by *Chlamydia trachomatis* serotypes D-K  <br> - Highly communicable via hands, fomites, flies, and other contact | - Neonate: manifests 5 to 19 days following birth, earlier if placental membranes have ruptured prior to delivery. Untreated cases may persist for 3 to 12 months  <br> - Adult: chronic inflammation regresses to cicatricial changes of conjunctiva and cornea  <br> - Consider co-infection with gonorrhea | - Neonate: Corneal scarring, conjunctival scarring; up to 50% have associated nasopharyngeal, genital, or pulmonary infection  <br> - Adults: Corneal infiltrates, pannus, cervicitis, urethritis, salpingitis, endometritis, perihepatitis |
| **Chlamydial (trachoma)** | - Unilateral or bilateral. Chronic. Bulbar conjunctival injection, follicular reaction of tarsal conjunctiva, mucoid discharge, corneal pannus, punctate epithelial keratitis, corneal opacity, entropion, trichiasis, preauricular lymphadenopathy  <br> - Distinctive sign: bulbar conjunctival follicles | - Caused by *C. trachomatis* serotypes A, B, and C  <br> - In low to middle income countries without adequate access to clean water and sanitation  <br> - Can be spread by direct or indirect contact with secretions from an affected person’s eyes, nose, or throat | - Repeated infections with conjunctivitis, muco-purulent discharge, preauricular lymphadenopathy  <br> - May persist/recur if untreated  <br> - Leading infectious cause of global blindness | - Herbert pits, conjunctival scarring, cicatricial entropion, trichiasis, limbal stem cell deficiency, corneal scarring/opacification, perforation, neovascularization |
######## Table 1: Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors for, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis
| **Type of Conjunctivitis**        | **Clinical Signs**                                                                                                                 | **Associated/Predisposing Factors**                                                                               | **Natural History**                                                                                                        | **Potential Sequelae**                                                                                                                                      |
|-----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome** | - Unilateral granulomatous follicular palpebral or bulbar conjunctivitis<br> - Associated ipsilateral regional (preauricular and submandibular) lymphadenopathy, fever, eyelid swelling, conjunctival granulomas, conjunctival injection, chemosis, serous discharge | - Most commonly in cat scratch disease (*Bartonella henselae*), tularemia (*Francisella tularensis*), and sporotrichosis<br> - Reported with various bacterial, fungal, mycobacterial, and viral infections[^92][^93] | - Follicular conjunctivitis with lymphadenopathy (concomitant or delayed by several weeks)<br> - May be self-limited (*Bartonella*) with improvement over a few weeks, but antimicrobials may hasten resolution<br> - Tularemia-associated may be more challenging to diagnose but usually responds to antibiotics[^92] | - Neuroretinitis, vitritis, ptosis<br> - Long-term sequelae rare<br> - Corneal perforation reported with *Yersinia enterocolitica* and *C. trachomatis*[^92] |
| **Deficiency Disease (other)**<br>**Ligneous conjunctivitis** | - 50% of cases are bilateral, chronic, recurrent conjunctivitis with bilateral, mucoid discharge, tearing, conjunctival injection, followed by pseudomembrane formation of palpebral conjunctiva involving upper eyelid, lower eyelid, or bulbar conjunctiva | - Genetic predisposition (may be inherited in autosomal recessive pattern) with PLG gene<br> - Single report of ligneous and immunoglobulin G4-related disease[^94]<br> - Females more likely symptomatic<br> - Pseudomembrane growth may be triggered by a local infection or injury[^95] | - Systemic plasminogen deficiency characterized by recurrent mucoid conjunctivitis followed by palpebral fibrinous pseudomembrane formation and mucosal thickening<br> - Can involve systemic pseudomembranous lesions and can be associated with fever, upper respiratory tract infection, ear infections, and/or urogenital tract infection<br> - Associated with congenital hydrocephalus and juvenile colloid milium | - Thick, firm/woody pseudomembranous structures on the palpebral conjunctiva<br> - Can cause chronic inflammation, corneal scarring, neovascularization, perforation, amblyopia, and vision loss<br> - Can be life threatening if involves the respiratory tract |
## Table 1: Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors for, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis
| Type of Conjunctivitis           | Clinical Signs                                                                                         | Associated/Predisposing Factors                                                                                          | Natural History                                     | Potential Sequelae                                                                                              |
|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Pediculosis palpebrarum (Phthirus pubis)** | - Unilateral or bilateral follicular conjunctivitis. Adult lice at the base of the eyelashes, nits (eggs) adherent to the eyelash shafts, blood-tinged debris on the eyelashes and eyelids | - Typically, sexually transmitted. May have associated pubic lice or other sexually transmitted diseases. In children, may be an indication of sexual abuse | - Blepharitis and conjunctivitis persist until treated | - Chronic blepharitis, conjunctivitis, and, rarely, marginal keratitis |
| **Factitious conjunctivitis**    | - Unilateral or bilateral. May have injection, discharge, photophobia, possibly pseudomembranes. The more accessible inferior conjunctiva is involved. Bulbar more commonly affected than tarsal conjunctiva. Varied patterns of corneal involvement reported. Presence of foreign bodies. - Inconsistent clinical findings⁹⁶ | - Mechanical trauma (i.e., scratching, beating, rubbing), chemical assaults, foreign bodies⁹⁷ - Underlying psychosocial comorbidity⁹⁸ - Younger age⁹⁹ | - Chronic ocular signs/symptoms are intentionally produced or feigned solely to assume the "sick role"⁹⁷ - Unresponsive to conventional therapies but patching or tarsorrhaphy may serve a diagnostic/therapeutic role | - Corneal scarring and neovascularization¹⁰⁰ - Severe forms of self-mutilation may escalate to include enucleation |
## TABLE 1: Typical Clinical Signs of Associated/Predisposing Factors for, and Natural History of Conjunctivitis
| **Type of Conjunctivitis** | **Clinical Signs**                                                                                                                                                       | **Associated/Predisposing Factors**                                               | **Natural History**                                                                                                   | **Potential Sequelae**                                     |
|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| Mucus fishing syndrome     | - Unilateral or bilateral. Signs of underlying disease causing irritation (e.g., dry eye, allergic conjunctivitis, or blepharitis) with excessive mucus and watery discharge, conjunctival injection, conjunctival staining of inferior fornix or globe. | - Mechanical trauma <br> - Associated disease causing irritation (e.g., dry eye, allergic conjunctivitis, or blepharitis) | - Starts with irritant or underlying external ocular disease. <br> - Cyclical, chronic nature of excessive mucous production and conjunctival inflammation is caused by repetitive mechanical removal of mucus from the surface of the globe or inferior cul-de-sac. | - Corneal or conjunctival scarring if repetitive damage from excoriation |
**NOTE:** Typical clinical signs may not be present in all cases. Distinctive signs are most useful in making a clinical diagnosis but may occur uncommonly. In all entities, laterality may vary and may be asymmetrical.
## CARE PROCESS
### PATIENT OUTCOME CRITERIA
Outcome criteria for treating conjunctivitis include the following:
- Eliminate or reduce signs and symptoms of conjunctivitis
- Restore or maintain normal visual function
- Detect and treat the underlying systemic disease process when applicable
- Prevent or reduce the likelihood of damage to the ocular surface and eyelids
- Prevent the spread of infectious conjunctivitis
### DIAGNOSIS
The initial evaluation of a patient should include the relevant aspects of the comprehensive medical eye evaluation, but some elements of the evaluation may be deferred in patients with symptoms and signs suggestive of infectious conjunctivitis.
#### History
Questions about the following elements of the patient history may elicit helpful information:
- Symptoms and signs (e.g., conjunctival injection, mattering and adherence of eyelids, itching, tearing, discharge, irritation, pain, photophobia, blurred vision)
- Duration of symptoms and time course
- Exacerbating factors
- Unilateral or bilateral presentation
- Character of discharge
- Recent exposure to an infected individual
- Trauma: mechanical, chemical, ultraviolet
- Recent surgery
- Mucus fishing behavior (i.e., repetitive manipulation and wiping of the conjunctiva leading to mechanical irritation)
- Contact lens wear: lens type, hygiene, and use regimen
- Symptoms and signs potentially related to systemic diseases (e.g., genitourinary discharge, dysuria, dysphagia, fever, upper respiratory infection, skin and mucosal lesions)
- Allergy, asthma, eczema
- Use of topical and systemic medications
The ocular history includes details about previous episodes of conjunctivitis, concomitant ocular surface diseases, and previous ophthalmic surgery.
The medical history considers the following:
- Compromised immune status (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus [HIV], chemotherapy, immunosuppressants)
- Current or prior systemic diseases (e.g., atopy, SJS/TEN, carcinoma, leukemia, chicken pox, GVHD), vaccination history
The social history should include smoking habits, exposure to second-hand smoke, occupation and hobbies, exposure to air pollutants, travel, exercise habits, diet, sexual activity, and use of illicit drugs.
#### Physical Examination
The initial eye examination includes measurement of visual acuity, an external examination, and slit-lamp biomicroscopy. The typical clinical signs for the types of conjunctivitis that are most common or most important to treat are listed in **Table 1.**
The external examination should include careful evaluation of the following:
- Regional lymphadenopathy, particularly preauricular
- **Skin**: signs of rosacea, eczema, seborrhea
- **Abnormalities of the eyelids and adnexae**: swelling, discoloration, malposition, laxity, ulceration, nodules, ecchymosis, neoplasia, lateral flare, lash loss
- **Orbits**: fullness, asymmetry
- **Conjunctiva**: laterality, type of conjunctival reaction (follicular vs. papillary), distribution (diffuse vs. sectoral or quadrantic), subconjunctival hemorrhage, chemosis, cicatricial change, symblepharon, masses, discharge
The slit-lamp biomicroscopy should include careful evaluation of the following:
- **Eyelid margins**: inflammation, edema, hyperpigmentation, meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD), ulceration, discharge, nodules or vesicles, blood-tinged debris, keratinization
- **Eyelashes**: loss of lashes, crusting, scurf, mites (*Demodex*), nits, lice, trichiasis
- **Lacrimal puncta and canaliculi**: pouting, discharge, edema
- **Tarsal and forniceal conjunctiva**:
  - Presence and size of papillae and/or follicles
  - Cicatricial changes, subepithelial fibrosis, fornix foreshortening, and symblepharon
  - Forniceal enlargement
  - Pseudomembranes and true membranes
  - Ulceration
  - Hemorrhages
  - Foreign material
  - Mucus discharge
  - Masses
  - Eyelid laxity
- **Bulbar conjunctiva/limbus**: follicles, edema, nodules, chemosis, laxity, papillae, ulceration, scarring, phlyctenules, hemorrhages, foreign material, keratinization
- **Cornea**:
  - Punctate keratopathy
  - Epithelial defects
  - Dendritic or pseudodendritic keratitis
  - Filaments
  - Infiltration, including subepithelial infiltrates and phlyctenules
  - Vascularization
  - Keratic precipitates with or without corneal edema
  - Ulceration
- **Dye-staining pattern**: conjunctiva and cornea (see Appendix 3), tear breakup time
- **Anterior chamber/iris**: inflammatory reaction, synechiae, transillumination defects
## Diagnostic Tests
Some cases of conjunctivitis can be diagnosed on the basis of history and examination (e.g., viral conjunctivitis in the presence of an upper respiratory infection). In other cases, however, additional diagnostic tests may be helpful.
### Cultures
Cultures for routine conjunctivitis (in the absence of listed risk factors) are rarely cost-effective or helpful in deciding on the treatment course. Cultures of the conjunctiva are indicated in all cases of suspected infectious neonatal conjunctivitis. Bacterial cultures and antibiotic susceptibility testing may be helpful for recurrent, severe, or chronic purulent conjunctivitis in any age group and in cases where the conjunctivitis has not responded to medication.
### Viral Diagnostic Tests
Viral diagnostic tests are not routinely used in practice to establish the diagnosis of adenovirus, but they may prevent misdiagnosis, disease spread, unnecessary antibiotic use, increased health care costs, and lost productivity. A rapid, in-office immunodiagnostic test.
using antigen detection is available for adenovirus conjunctivitis. In a study of 186 patients with acute conjunctivitis, this test had a sensitivity of 88% to 89% and a specificity of 91% to 94%. Immunoassay and immunochromatography testing has demonstrated high specificity for adenovirus but variable sensitivity, ranging between 40% and 93%. Other highly sensitive and specific tests that may assist in the early diagnosis of adenovirus include Raman spectroscopy of tears and the quantification of hyaluronic acid in tear fluid. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) may be used to detect viral deoxyribonucleic acid. Availability will vary depending on the laboratory.
Suspicion of certain less common viruses that can cause conjunctivitis (e.g., arboviruses, measles, COVID-19, Zika, and Mpox) is often based on history, particularly travel, exposures, vaccination status, and on review of systems. The appropriate identification test (often through PCR of a conjunctival sample or serum antibody) can be ordered. Detection of the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) virus in ocular secretions involves reverse transcriptase-PCR, viral culture, or cytopathic effects via sampling from direct conjunctival (or oropharyngeal) swabs, Schirmer’s test strips, and glass capillary micropipettes.
### Chlamydial Diagnostic Tests
Suspected cases of adult and neonatal chlamydial conjunctivitis can be confirmed by laboratory testing. Immunologically based diagnostic tests are available, including a direct immunofluorescent antibody test and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. These tests have been largely supplanted by PCR for genital specimens, and, therefore, their availability for conjunctival specimens is more limited. Although specimens from the eye have been used with satisfactory performance, these applications have not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Further testing can be performed through culture.
### Smears/Cytology
Smears for cytology and special stains (e.g., Gram, Giemsa) are recommended in cases of suspected infectious neonatal conjunctivitis, chronic or recurrent conjunctivitis, and in cases of suspected gonococcal conjunctivitis in any age group. Conjunctival scrapings of patients with vernal conjunctivitis often contain eosinophils and mast cells. Epilation with microscopic examination can allow for detection of mites (e.g., *Demodex*) or pathogens such as lice/nits (e.g., *Phthirus pubis*).
### Biopsy
Conjunctival biopsy may be helpful in cases of conjunctivitis that are unresponsive to therapy or a diagnostic challenge (e.g., factitious). Because such eyes may harbor a neoplasm, directed biopsy may be both vision saving and lifesaving. Conjunctival biopsy and immunofluorescent staining diagnostic tests may be helpful to establish the diagnosis of diseases such as ocular mucous membrane pemphigoid (OMMP) and paraneoplastic syndromes. The diagnosis is typically one of exclusion, and a conjunctival biopsy for immunopathology confirms the diagnosis, although false negatives are frequent. If the biopsy is negative and the disease is progressive, OMMP should be assumed, and multiple biopsies should be avoided. In cases of suspected sebaceous carcinoma, a full-thickness eyelid biopsy is indicated. Tissue biopsy from the skin, conjunctiva, lacrimal glands, orbital tissue, lungs, or lymph nodes remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of sarcoidosis and autoimmune vasculitis. For suspected conjunctival lymphoma, incisional biopsy for histopathological and cytological examination is recommended with immunoprofiling via immunohistochemistry or flow cytometry and/or molecular studies.
### Allergy Skin Testing
Allergy skin testing is highly sensitive and specific for aeroallergens. Skin prick testing (SPT) and pollen immunoglobulin E (IgE) detection may be helpful in identifying allergens to target with immunosuppression.
One Italian study showed that of patients with ocular allergy, 82% had positive tests for specific allergic sensitizations.¹²⁵ In vernal keratoconjunctivitis (VKC), a positive SPT identified at least one allergen in 43% to 55% of patients.²⁸
Patch testing can delineate the specific antigens if a delayed-type hypersensitivity (i.e., contact blepharoconjunctivitis) is suspected (e.g., preservatives such as benzalkonium chloride, thimerosal, contact lens solutions).¹²⁶
### Tear Immunoglobulin E
Tear IgE quantitatively measures IgE in tears and may be useful in diagnosing allergic conjunctivitis and assessing its severity.¹²⁷ In patients with vernal conjunctivitis, IgE mediated hypersensitivity by component-resolved diagnostics in tears and serum may be helpful.¹²⁸ Component-resolved diagnostics maps the allergen sensitization at a molecular level, using purified natural or recombinant allergenic molecules instead of allergen extracts.
The association of vernal conjunctivitis with allergy/atopy is widely accepted, but it is associated with specific IgE sensitization in less than 50% of cases.
### Conjunctival Allergen Challenge
An allergen challenge (provocation test) of the conjunctiva exposes the eyes to increasing concentrations of a specific allergen (that previously elicited a positive skin test reaction) until a reaction is induced on the ocular surface. The subjects evaluate ocular itching and trained clinicians evaluate redness.
Because the challenge reproduces the signs and symptoms of seasonal allergic conjunctivitis, it can be used to test the duration and activity of pharmacologic therapies. Although it is used primarily for study purposes, the challenge may be useful in predicting the impact of preseasonal immunotherapy on symptoms.¹²⁹
### Blood Tests
- **Thyroid antibody tests** are indicated for patients with SLK who do not have known thyroid disease.³⁴
- **Vitamin D level** may be lower and serum IgE levels may be higher in patients with allergic conjunctivitis.¹³⁰,¹³¹ The benefits of supplementation with vitamin D are being studied.¹³²-¹³⁴ Serum IgE measurements should be considered in cases with inconsistent SPT results or when SPT is not possible.¹³⁵,¹³⁶
- Certain serologies may be indicated based on presentation (i.e., _Bartonella henselae_ and _Francisella tularensis_ in the setting of Parinaud’s Oculoglandular syndrome).
- Patients with sarcoidosis often have elevated serum angiotensin-converting enzyme levels, elevated serum lysozyme, and/or abnormal liver enzyme tests.
- Testing for antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies may be used to diagnose autoimmune vasculitis, including granulomatosis with polyangiitis, microscopic polyangiitis, and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss syndrome).
- Along with histopathological examination of the suspected “woody” lesions, low plasminogen activity may confirm suspicion of ligneous conjunctivitis.
### Imaging Studies
- A chest x-ray, chest computed tomography scan, and/or gallium scintigraphy may aid the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. In cases of Kawasaki disease, a transthoracic echocardiogram may detect cardiac artery abnormalities.
- Corneal topography/tomography can be useful to screen for keratoconus in patients with allergic-type conjunctivitis (especially vernal and atopic) and floppy eyelid syndrome.¹³⁷-¹³⁹ Corneal biomechanical testing or corneal hysteresis may also have a role in detecting ectasia and keratoconus in this population.¹⁴⁰
## MANAGEMENT
### Prevention
Early diagnosis and treatment of infectious conjunctivitis is important to reduce the public health and economic impact of community spread. Additionally, patients with serious systemic disease may initially present with conjunctivitis. A thorough review of systems may help identify nonocular symptoms. For example, some types of neonatal conjunctivitis are associated with pneumonia, otitis media, or Kawasaki disease. In adults, conjunctivitis caused by OMMP, GVHD, gonococcus, and chlamydia is important to detect early because it is necessary to treat the concomitant systemic disorder. Diagnosis of SLK may lead to further investigations that reveal a thyroid disorder.¹⁴²,¹⁴³ Diagnosis of floppy eyelid may aid in the diagnosis of sleep apnea or keratoconus.¹⁴⁴ Early detection of conjunctivitis associated with neoplasms may be lifesaving.
Individuals can protect against some chemical and toxin exposures by using adequate eye protection. Contact lens wearers can be instructed in appropriate lens care and frequent lens replacement to reduce the risk or severity of giant papillary conjunctivitis.
Allergen-specific immunotherapy is beneficial in reducing allergic conjunctivitis, more so in children than adults.¹⁴⁵ Both subcutaneous and sublingual immunotherapy have been found to reduce symptoms and medication requirements in patients with allergic rhinoconjunctivitis.¹⁴⁶ *(I+, Moderate, Strong)* A multidisciplinary approach with pediatricians, internists, and allergists is essential in managing ocular hypersensitivity disorders.
Infectious conjunctivitis can be prevented with prophylactic treatment, applying vaccination strategies, and breaking chains of transmission. Neonatal conjunctivitis can often be prevented by means of prenatal screening and treatment of the expectant mother and by prophylactic treatment of the infant at birth. Single-use tubes of ophthalmic ointment containing 0.5% erythromycin are used as the standard prophylactic agent to prevent ophthalmia neonatorum.¹¹,¹⁴⁷ *(I+, Insufficient, Strong)* Povidone-iodine solution 2.5% has been suggested as an alternative to antibiotic ointments to prevent neonatal conjunctivitis,¹⁴⁸,¹⁴⁹ but it may be less effective and more toxic to the ocular surface.¹⁵⁰
The incidence of varicella (herpes) zoster virus is reduced by the chickenpox and the shingles vaccines. Currently, there is one herpes zoster vaccine available for adults in the United States: recombinant zoster vaccine (RZV). Zoster vaccine live was discontinued in November 2020. Ophthalmologists and other health care professionals should strongly recommend immunocompetent patients 50 years or older without contraindications to obtain vaccination against herpes zoster.¹² The vaccine is also recommended for immunocompromised patients 19 years and older.
The spread of measles can be effectively limited by vaccination. The CDC and the World Health Organization strongly recommend measles vaccination for children age 1 year and older and adults born in 1957 or later who do not display measles immunity.¹⁵¹ The spread of epidemic adenoviral conjunctivitis can be limited by educating the patient and family about proper hygiene. Infected individuals should be counseled to wash hands frequently with soap and water (as opposed to sanitizer only), use separate towels and pillows, and avoid close contact with others during the period of contagion. Avoiding contact with others is especially important for individuals in professions with high potential for transmission, such as healthcare workers and childcare providers. Although the exact length of the period of infectivity is variable, many consider 7 days from the onset of symptoms (in the second eye, when involved) as the contagious period, because the recovery of virus from infected cases is difficult after 7 to 10 days of infection.¹⁵² Other studies have suggested that patients should be considered potentially contagious for at least 10 to 14 days.¹³³,¹⁵³
Health care facilities have occasionally been associated with epidemic outbreaks of adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis that may last from weeks to years.¹⁵²-¹⁵⁷ To avoid cross-contamination,
## Treatment
Treatment of conjunctivitis is ideally directed at the root cause. Early detection and treatment can be both sight saving and, in select cases, lifesaving. Indiscriminate use of topical antibiotics or corticosteroids should be avoided because antibiotics can induce toxicity, and corticosteroids can potentially prolong adenoviral infections and worsen HSV infections. Treatment methods are described below for the most common types of conjunctivitis and for those types that are particularly important to treat.
### Seasonal/Perennial Allergic Conjunctivitis
- Recommendations often include wearing sunglasses as a barrier to airborne allergens, cold compresses, refrigerated artificial tears, avoiding eye rubbing, and avoiding allergens.
  - Hypoallergenic bedding, eyelid cleansers to remove allergens, frequent clothes washing, and bathing/showering before bedtime may also be helpful.
- Mild allergic conjunctivitis can be treated with:
  - An over-the-counter topical antihistamine/vasoconstrictor agent or with more effective second-generation topical histamine H1-receptor antagonists.
  - Many topical medications can be stored in the refrigerator, as the cooling sensation upon instillation of the eye drop can provide symptomatic relief.
  - Chronic use of vasoconstrictor agents can be associated with rebound vasodilation once the agent is stopped.
  - If the condition is frequently recurrent or persistent, mast-cell stabilizers can be used.
    - Many new medications combine antihistaminic activity with mast-cell stabilizing properties and can be used for either acute or chronic disease.
- The use of topical mast-cell inhibitors can also be helpful in alleviating the symptoms of allergic rhinitis.
  - Mast-cell inhibitors formulated as a nasal spray and aerosols are also helpful in alleviating the symptoms of allergic rhinitis and asthma in some patients.
#### Table 2: Topical Medications for Seasonal Allergic Conjunctivitis
| Generic Name                | Trade Name                           | Class                                     | Typical Daily Dose |
|-----------------------------|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| Alcaftadine                | Lastacaft                           | H1-antagonist                            | 1                  |
| Azelastine HCl             | Generic                             | H1-antagonist/mast-cell inhibitor        | 2                  |
| Bepotastine besilate       | Bepreve                             | H1-antagonist/mast-cell inhibitor        | 2                  |
| Cromolyn sodium            | Generic                             | Mast-cell inhibitor                      | 4–6                |
| Epinastine HCl             | Generic                             | H1- and H2-antagonist/mast-cell inhibitor| 2                  |
| Ketorolac tromethamine     | Acular, Acular LS                   | NSAID*                                   | 4                  |
| Ketotifen fumarate         | Alaway, Zaditor (OTC)               | H1-antagonist/mast-cell inhibitor        | 2                  |
| Lodoxamide tromethamine    | Alomide                             | Mast-cell inhibitor                      | 4                  |
| Loteprednol etabonate (0.2% or 0.5%) | Alrex, Lotemax                     | Corticosteroid†                          | 4                  |
| Naphazoline/antazoline     | Vasocon-A (OTC)                     | Antihistamine/decongestant               | 4                  |
| Naphazoline/pheniramine    | Naphcon-A (OTC), Opcon-A (OTC), Visine-A (OTC) | Antihistamine/decongestant/vasoconstrictor*   | 4 |
| Nedocromil sodium          | Alocril                             | Mast-cell inhibitor                      | 2                  |
| Olopatadine HCl            | Pataday Twice Daily (0.1%)          | H1-antagonist/mast-cell inhibitor        | 2 (0.1%)           |
|                           | Pataday Once Daily (0.2%)           |                                          | 1 (0.2%)           |
|                           | Pataday Once Daily Extra Strength (0.7%) |                                          | 1 (0.7%)           |
| Cetirizine                 | Zerviate                            | H1 antagonist                            | 2                  |
*Adapted with permission from PDR Network LLC. Table 11. Agents for Relief of Seasonal Allergic Conjunctivitis. In: *PDR for Ophthalmic Medicines 2024, 40th ed.* Montvale, NJ: PDR Network LLC; 2011:9. Updated November 2023.
**Notes:**
HCL = hydrochloride; NSAID = nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; OTC = over the counter.
* Caution: Should not be used long term owing to rebound vasodilation.
† Use with caution in patients who have ocular surface disease.
‡ Increased intraocular pressure, cataractogenesis.
Consultation with an allergist or dermatologist may be helpful for patients who have disease that cannot be adequately controlled with topical medications and oral antihistamines. Allergen-specific immunotherapy, in which increasing subcutaneous or sublingual doses of the trigger allergens are administered to achieve hyposensitization, are useful.^(145, 185-188) (**+, Moderate, Strong**) But usage may be limited by expense, long-term patient commitment, and the risk of anaphylaxis.^189-191 (**-, Moderate, Discretionary**)
Intralymphatic immunotherapy, which appears to also provide short-term benefits, has unclear efficacy beyond a year. *192 (I+, Moderate, Discretionary)*
Frequency of follow-up visits is based on the severity of disease presentation, etiology, and treatment. Timing of visits during symptomatic periods should be considered. A follow-up visit should include an interval history, measurement of visual acuity, and slit-lamp biomicroscopy. If corticosteroids are used in chronic or recurrent conjunctivitis, baseline and periodic measurement of IOP and pupillary dilation should be performed to evaluate for glaucoma *193* and cataract. Allergic conjunctivitis and atopic disease are associated with keratoconus—in these cases, adequate control of allergy and eye rubbing are important to decrease progression of ectasia. *194-197* (This is discussed in more detail in the Corneal Ectasia PPP. *198*)
### Vernal Conjunctivitis
Strategies to treat vernal conjunctivitis parallel stepwise treatment in other ocular surface hypersensitivity disorders such as perennial allergic conjunctivitis. General treatment measures include modifying the environment to minimize exposure to allergens or irritants and using cool compresses and ocular lubricants. Topical and oral antihistamines and topical mast-cell stabilizers can be useful to maintain comfort.
For acute exacerbations of vernal conjunctivitis, topical corticosteroids are usually necessary to control severe symptoms and signs. *8, 9 (I+, Moderate, Strong)* Topical cyclosporine 2% has demonstrated a reduction in signs and symptoms compared with placebo after 2 weeks of use in patients with VKC. *199, 200* Commercially available 0.05% topical cyclosporine used at least four times daily has also been shown to be effective for the treatment of severe vernal conjunctivitis, and it has been shown to be effective in preventing seasonal recurrences. *201-205* Cyclosporine 0.1% is the first and only topical immunomodulator FDA approved for the specific treatment of VKC in children and adults. *206* Use of cyclosporine, interferon-alpha-2b, and tacrolimus may avoid long-term use of topical steroids *207* and in cases refractory to steroid treatment. *208, 209* For severe sight-threatening vernal keratoconjunctivitis that is not responsive to topical therapy, supratarsal injection of corticosteroid can be considered. *210*
### Atopic Conjunctivitis
As with other ocular hypersensitivity disorders, conservative strategies to reduce allergen exposure with hand hygiene and lubrication are combined with other therapies to reduce IgE response via antihistamines and mast cell stabilizers. Next-line therapies for moderate disease include topical corticosteroids and topical calcineurin inhibitors such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus targeted at T-cell activity.
Tacrolimus is available as a 0.03% and 0.1% topical ointment for dermatologic use in the United States (Protopic). It has been used off-label for treatment of ophthalmic disease. *211*
In patients 2 years old or older, eyelid involvement can be treated with pimecrolimus cream 1% or topical tacrolimus ointment. *212-214* Tacrolimus drops/ointment 0.03% is used for children 2 years to 15 years old; either 0.03% or 0.1% is used for patients 16 years and older. *215* Randomized clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of topical tacrolimus 0.1% applied conjunctivally in patients who had failed conjunctivitis therapy with topical corticosteroids, cyclosporine, and/or antiallergy medications. *216* These agents may make patients more susceptible to herpes simplex keratitis. *217* Systemic therapies are rarely warranted, but options include montelukast, *218* aspirin, and oral T-cell inhibitors, such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus. *32, 117, 107, 219-221* The efficacy of these systemic treatments are inconclusive as there are no randomized trials. *222 (Insufficient, Discretionary)* Tacrolimus or pimecrolimus are rarely associated with development of skin cancer or lymphoma. *223, 224*
For all forms of allergic conjunctivitis, which may require repeat short-term therapy with topical corticosteroids, patients should be informed about potential complications of corticosteroid therapy, and general strategies to minimize corticosteroid use should be employed.
Frequency of follow-up visits is based on the severity of disease presentation, etiology, and treatment. Consultation with a dermatologist is often helpful. A follow-up visit should include an interval history, measurement of visual acuity, and slit-lamp biomicroscopy. If corticosteroids are prescribed, baseline and periodic measurement of IOP and pupillary dilation should be performed to evaluate for glaucoma and cataract. Discussion of the treatment of complications such as corneal plaques and ulceration is beyond the scope of this document.225 Keratoconus, which is also associated with allergic and vernal conjunctivitis, is discussed in more detail in the Corneal Ectasia PPP.227 Notably, vernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis should be controlled prior to corneal cross-linking to decrease the risk of developing sterile keratitis.226
### Superior Limbic Keratoconjunctivitis
Mild cases of SLK may respond to treatment of concomitant dry eye syndrome with lubricants, mast-cell stabilizers, cyclosporine,227 soft contact lenses, and/or punctal occlusion; however, the condition may not respond or the response may be temporary. Associated filamentary keratitis may occasionally respond to topical 10% acetylcysteine228 or hypertonic (5%) saline.229 The exact pathogenesis of SLK is unclear.230 Persistent symptoms may necessitate surgical intervention such as cautery (chemical or thermal) to tighten redundant conjunctiva or conjunctival resection.231 Up to 65% of patients with SLK may have underlying thyroid dysfunction, and many of these have associated ophthalmopathy.35 An underlying thyroid disorder should be investigated by means of thyroid antibody tests.34,35 Because SLK may persist with exacerbations over a period of years, treatment and frequency of follow-up are driven by the patient’s symptoms. Systemic treatment of underlying thyroid disease does not have an impact on the SLK, however. Patients should be informed that this is a chronic and recurrent condition that rarely can decrease vision.
### Blepharitis
See the Blepharitis PPP.37
### Rosacea Conjunctivitis
Treatments include eyelid hygiene, warm compresses, systemic tetracyclines, topical corticosteroids and cyclosporine, topical metronidazole creams and ointment, mechanical thermal pulsations, and intense pulse light therapy. (See the Blepharitis PPP37 for more details.)
### Contact Lens–Related Keratoconjunctivitis
This phenomenon is essentially hypoxia of the limbal stem cells creating punctate epithelial keratitis, pannus, neovascularization, inflammation, edema, and ultimately epitheliopathy, which can impact visual function and, if ignored, can be permanent. If moderate or severe pain is present, amoebic keratitis should be considered. In cases of contact lens–related keratoconjunctivitis, contact lens wear should be discontinued until the cornea returns to normal. In mild cases, a brief (1 to 2 weeks) course of topical corticosteroids may be prescribed, in addition to longer-term use of topical cyclosporine 0.05%. If related to limbal stem cell failure, symptoms may be prolonged, but they will usually ultimately clear with contact lens abstinence.232-234 At the follow-up evaluation, the contact lens fit, type, and care regimen should be reviewed (e.g., nonpreserved lens care systems, daily disposable contact lenses, high DK/t ratio material, lens materials, reduction in contact lens wear time) and consideration should be given to alternatives to contact lenses (e.g., eyeglasses or refractive surgery) once the keratoconjunctivitis has resolved. Contact lens abstinence can be a challenge for some patients because the punctate keratopathy may lead to reduced vision correction in glasses.
### Giant Papillary Conjunctivitis
The treatment of GPC generally involves modifying the causative entity. Protruding suture knots can be treated by removing or replacing the sutures, rotating the knots, or using a
## Floppy Eyelid Syndrome
Temporary relief of floppy eyelid syndrome is afforded by taping the patient’s eyelids shut or by having the patient wear a protective shield while sleeping. Lubricants may help in managing mild cases. Definitive therapy involves surgical procedures such as lateral canthus repair, horizontal shortening of the upper eyelid, or excision of the medial upper lid. Follow-up depends on the patient’s clinical course. Floppy eyelid syndrome has been associated with obstructive sleep apnea, keratoconus, and obesity, and providers may consider consultations with specialists.
## Giant Fornix Syndrome
Cultures are nearly always positive for *Staphylococcus aureus*, although other organisms are possible. Many patients have concomitant nasolacrimal duct obstruction and chronic dacryocystitis, which may need to be addressed surgically. Treatment with systemic anti-staphylococcal antibiotics and intensive topical antibiotics and corticosteroids is recommended for temporary improvement. More recently, supratarsal injections of antibiotics or corticosteroids, along with irrigation and sweeping of the superior fornix with povidone-iodine solution, have been advocated. Given the increasing frequency of methicillin-resistant *S. aureus* (MRSA) in the general population, conjunctival cultures before starting treatment can help guide the appropriate choice of antibiotic. In addition, surgical correction of ptosis may be helpful.
## Pediculosis Palpebrarum (*Phthirus pubis*)
Forceps can be used to mechanically remove the adult lice and nits (eggs) from the eyelids and eyelashes. Adherent nits may require epilation of the involved lashes. Cutting the lashes at their base with Westcott or other microsurgical scissors is an alternative for heavy infestation of adherent nits. A bland ophthalmic ointment (e.g., petrolatum, erythromycin, bacitracin) applied two to three times a day for 10 days will smother the adult lice and nits. Compliance is important for eradication. Patients and close contacts should be advised to use anti-lice lotion and shampoo for nonocular areas and to wash and dry clothing and bedding thoroughly (using the highest temperature of the dryer for 30 minutes). Patients and sexual contacts should be informed about the possibility of concomitant disease and should be referred appropriately. Sexual abuse should be considered in children with *P. pubis* infestation.
## Medication-induced/Preservative-Induced Keratoconjunctivitis
Discontinuation of the agent responsible for medication-induced keratoconjunctivitis usually results in resolution over a period of weeks to months. If severe inflammation of the conjunctiva or eyelid is present, a brief course of topical corticosteroids is indicated, often with preservative-free formulations. At follow-up visits, the clinician should look to prevent further irritation using the appropriate management strategies.
## Ocular Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid Conjunctivitis
Topical corticosteroid therapy may aid in controlling acute conjunctival inflammation, but systemic immunosuppressive therapy is required to inhibit inflammation, prevent keratopathy, and prevent progression of conjunctival scarring.
Because Ocular Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid (OMMP) is a chronic, progressive disease characterized by subepithelial fibrosis with frequent remissions and exacerbations of disease activity, it may be difficult to gauge the response to therapy accurately. Grading systems and photographic documentation of the conjunctiva may be helpful to assess disease progression.
Mild and slowly progressive disease may be treated using mycophenolate mofetil, dapsone, azathioprine, or methotrexate.
If dapsone is considered, caution should be taken in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency.
For severe inflammation or for inflammation unresponsive to treatment with other agents, cyclophosphamide should be considered.
Other therapies that may be effective for treatment or adjunctive therapy include:
- Oral tetracycline and niacinamide
- Sulfasalazine
- Mycophenolate mofetil
- Intravenous immunoglobulin
- Biologics
These therapies can be used alone or in combination. Refractory cases may benefit from combination intravenous immunoglobulin and rituximab.
In general, a physician with expertise in immunosuppressive therapy should administer and monitor the treatment to minimize and manage side effects.
Associated dry eye state should be treated aggressively, and trichiasis, distichiasis, and entropion should be treated nonsurgically if possible. Mucous membrane or amniotic membrane grafting for fornix reconstruction may be considered. In advanced disease with corneal blindness, keratoprosthesis surgery may improve vision; however, all ocular reconstructive surgery is considered high risk.
The timing and frequency of follow-up visits is based on the severity of disease presentation, etiology, and treatment phase.
Close observation for clinical signs of disease with visual acuity measurement, slit-lamp biomicroscopy, and documentation of corneal and conjunctival changes to monitor progression is recommended. Ocular procedures such as cataract surgery may worsen the disease.
Perioperative immunosuppression and close postoperative follow-up are warranted in such cases.
## Graft-versus-Host Disease
Patients with multisystemic systemic GVHD are treated with systemic immunosuppression. Systemic corticosteroids are the mainstay of initial treatment and are commonly used in combination with a T-cell inhibitor (cyclosporine or tacrolimus).
In corticosteroid-refractory GVHD, numerous therapies have been studied, including cyclophosphamide, biologics, and photopheresis, with varied success depending on the systems involved and the severity of the disease.
For ocular GVHD, aggressive lubrication is particularly useful in treating patients with secondary keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Punctal occlusion can be considered. There is a role for topical corticosteroids in treating conjunctival hyperemia and scarring.
Topical T-cell modulators (cyclosporine) and autologous serum tears can be used to treat dry eye syndrome associated with GVHD.
Treating the underlying inflammatory may help to reduce conjunctival damage leading to dry eye disease.
Other secondary complications of ocular GVHD such as cicatricial eyelid malposition or limbal stem cell failure should be managed on a case-by-case basis. For vision correction and relief from dry eye symptoms in these patients, scleral lenses may be helpful.
## Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
Early intervention is critical to prevent late ocular complications.
SJS/TEN ranges from hyperemia of the conjunctiva to complete sloughing of the ocular surface epithelium. Medical management with topical lubricants, antibiotics, and anti-inflammatories is recommended. Eyelid hygiene and periodic sweeping of the conjunctival fornices may interrupt symblepharon formation.
Early amniotic membrane transplantation on the ocular surface and eyelid margin is highly recommended to stabilize.
## Sebaceous Carcinoma
When a diagnosis of sebaceous carcinoma is confirmed by an eyelid biopsy, excision is indicated. The excision should be performed by a surgeon experienced in the treatment of eyelid tumors, and adjunctive therapy should be used as needed for any residual pagetoid component.
If uncertainty in labeling, handling, or processing of the specimen exists, prior discussion with the pathologist who is to prepare and read the specimen is beneficial.
## Ocular Surface Squamous Neoplasia
When a diagnosis of ocular surface squamous neoplasia is confirmed by biopsy, treatment may consist of local excision with cryotherapy to the edges and/or topical chemotherapeutic agents (mitomycin-C or fluorouracil).
Interferon, an effective topical therapy for ocular surface squamous neoplasia, is no longer manufactured. Some studies have indicated that topical chemotherapeutics alone may completely lead to resolution of the malignancy. The optimal treatment should be tailored to the patient/tumor needs and be done by an experienced specialist.
Anterior segment optical coherence tomography may facilitate diagnosis and follow-up for patients with ocular surface squamous neoplasia.
## Adenoviral Conjunctivitis
The majority of cases of acute, infectious conjunctivitis in the adult population are viral and self-limited; these cases do not require antimicrobial treatment. Patients with adenoviral conjunctivitis need to understand that the condition is highly contagious and that this is a hearty virus that can survive for many weeks on a countertop or similar surface if careful disinfection doesn’t occur. Because of its ability to infect multiple members of a family, classmates at school, or staff or clients at work, this infection is often termed epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC).
The patient should be educated about measures that will help reduce the spread of this infection and encouraged to make every attempt to minimize contact with other people for 10 to 14 days from the onset of symptoms in the last eye affected.
To minimize spread within the clinic, consider an abbreviated exam in a dedicated exam room with limited physical interaction. Physical exam may include swollen and tender preauricular or submandibular lymph nodes. Slit-lamp exam should focus on identifying membranes or pseudomembranes, corneal epithelial defects, dendrites, filaments, or infiltrates. Depending on exam findings, follow-up might be a couple of days to 1 to 2 weeks. The clinician is often asked for advice on how to balance public health concerns and work/school requirements. This can be a particularly difficult issue for patients working in health care, food service, or sales. Some occupations allow for work at home or from the privacy of an individual office or similar setting.
There is no proven effective treatment for eradication of adenovirus infection; however, artificial tears, topical antihistamines, topical steroids, oral analgesics, or cold compresses may be used to mitigate symptoms. The use of antibiotics in the management of this viral infection should be avoided because of potential adverse treatment effects.
Topical corticosteroids are helpful to reduce symptoms and may reduce scarring in severe cases of adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis with marked chemosis or eyelid swelling, epithelial sloughing, or membranous conjunctivitis. Close follow-up is warranted for patients with adenoviral conjunctivitis who are being treated with corticosteroids.
In an animal model of adenoviral conjunctivitis, administration of topical corticosteroids led to prolonged viral shedding.
It is not known whether this is the case in humans.
Because of its broad antimicrobial spectrum, povidone-iodine has been investigated as a treatment consideration. Off-label use of topical ganciclovir 0.15% ophthalmic gel has been investigated for the treatment of EKC and has shown potential benefit against specific adenovirus serotypes, but further efficacy on a larger scale needs to be demonstrated before definitive recommendations can be made.
For patients with membranous conjunctivitis, debridement of the membrane can be considered to prevent corneal epithelial abrasions or permanent cicatricial changes (e.g., foreshortening of the conjunctival fornix).
Patients with severe disease who have corneal epithelial ulceration or membranous conjunctivitis should be re-evaluated within 1 week. Patients who are prescribed prolonged topical corticosteroids should be monitored by periodically measuring IOP and pupillary dilation to evaluate for glaucoma and cataract. Topical corticosteroids should be tapered once inflammation is controlled.
Patients who are not treated with topical corticosteroids should be instructed to return for follow-up if they continue to experience symptoms of red eye, pain, or decreased vision after 2 to 3 weeks. This follow-up visit should include an interval history, measurement of visual acuity, and slit-lamp biomicroscopy.
During follow-up, patients should be evaluated for the presence of corneal subepithelial infiltrates, which typically occur 1 or more weeks after the onset of conjunctivitis. Treatment of subepithelial infiltrates varies with the severity of the disease. In mild cases, observation is sufficient. In cases with blurring, photophobia, and decreased vision, topical corticosteroids at the minimum effective dose may be considered. Cyclosporine drops ranging from commercially available concentrations of 0.05% to higher compounded dosages of 1% have been found to be a helpful alternative in reducing subepithelial infiltrates.294, 295
Patients who are being treated with topical corticosteroids should have the dosage slowly tapered to the minimum effective dose. Corticosteroids with poor ocular penetration, including fluorometholone or site-specific corticosteroids such as loteprednol, may be less likely to result in elevated IOP or cataract formation. Follow-up examinations should be conducted regularly. Visits should include an interval history, measurement of visual acuity and IOP, and slit-lamp biomicroscopy. Recurrence of subepithelial infiltrates has been reported in patients with a history of adenoviral infection who have undergone photorefractive keratectomy or LASIK.296
## Herpes Simplex Virus Conjunctivitis
Herpes simplex virus conjunctivitis is a self-limited acute condition. Treatment is usually instigated upon high suspicion or concomitant corneal involvement. Possible topical options include ganciclovir 0.15% gel used three to five times per day297 or trifluridine 1% solution five to eight times per day.298 Oral treatments for HSV conjunctivitis include acyclovir (200 to 400 mg five times a day), valacyclovir (500 mg two or three times a day), or famciclovir (250 mg twice a day). Anecdotal experience suggests that higher doses of oral antivirals may also be effective in cases that appear to demonstrate resistance to therapy. Topical trifluridine inevitably causes epithelial toxicity if used for more than 2 weeks. Topical ganciclovir is less toxic to the ocular surface.299 Oral antivirals alone may not be adequate in preventing the progression of HSV blepharoconjunctivitis, but the addition of topical antiviral treatment has been effective.300 Lower doses of oral antivirals are considered for long-term prophylaxis against recurrent HSV conjunctivitis and keratitis. Topical corticosteroids potentiate HSV epithelial infections and should be avoided. Within 1 week of treatment, patients should have a follow-up visit consisting of an interval history, visual acuity measurement, and slit-lamp biomicroscopy. Neonates require prompt consultation with the pediatrician or primary care physician, because systemic HSV infection is a life-threatening condition.301
## Varicella (Herpes) Zoster Virus Conjunctivitis
Children with chicken pox may present with conjunctivitis that is sometimes associated with eyelid ulceration and/or limbal or conjunctival vesicles. Many clinicians treat such patients with topical antibiotics to prevent secondary infection because the vesicles will undergo necrosis before healing. Severe conjunctival scarring from secondary bacterial infection can even lead to an eyelid ectropion.302 Topical antivirals alone have not been shown to be helpful in treating VZV conjunctivitis but may be used as additive treatment in unresponsive patients.303 In rare cases, dendritic or stromal keratitis can occur. Varicella zoster virus conjunctivitis can be associated with other forms of ocular disease including pseudodendrites, keratitis, corneal scarring, corneal vascularization, iritis/uveitis, sectoral iris atrophy, and secondary glaucoma.304 With persistent or recalcitrant acute/subacute
## Molluscum Contagiosum
Conjunctivitis and keratitis from molluscum contagiosum are due to viral shedding from the eyelid lesion(s) onto the surface of the eye. Molluscum lesions may spontaneously resolve, but they can also persist for months to years. Treatment to remove the lesions is indicated in symptomatic patients. Treatment options include incision and curettage (aggressive enough to cause bleeding), simple excision, excision and cautery, and cryotherapy. In patients with multiple lesions, care should be taken to identify and treat nascent lesions in order to reduce the risk of recurrence, but reduction of the viral load often allows the host immunologic response to eliminate residual virus. The conjunctivitis may require weeks to resolve after elimination of the lesion. In adults, large and multiple molluscum lesions with relatively little conjunctival inflammation may indicate an immunocompromised state. Follow-up is not usually necessary unless the conjunctivitis persists. Referral to a dermatologist may be necessary for examination of other suspicious lesions.
## Bacterial Conjunctivitis
### Mild Bacterial Conjunctivitis
Mild bacterial conjunctivitis is usually self-limited, and it typically resolves spontaneously without specific treatment in immune-competent adults. Use of topical antibacterial therapy is associated with earlier clinical and microbiological remission compared with placebo in days 2 to 5 of treatment. These advantages persist over days 6 to 10, but the extent of benefit over placebo lessens over time. Treatment may reduce transmissibility and allow for an earlier return to school for children. The choice of antibiotic is usually empiric. Because a 5- to 7-day course of a broad-spectrum topical antibiotic is usually effective, the most convenient or least expensive option can be selected; there is no clinical evidence suggesting the superiority of any particular antibiotic. Povidone-iodine 1.25% ophthalmic solution may be as effective as topical antibiotic therapy for treating bacterial conjunctivitis and could be considered when access to antibiotics is limited, such as in low- to middle-income countries. Although there are no data supporting the cost-effectiveness of using antibiotics in mild bacterial conjunctivitis, the shortened morbidity associated with their use makes choice of therapy an individual decision.
### Moderate to Severe Bacterial Conjunctivitis
Moderate to severe bacterial conjunctivitis is characterized by copious purulent discharge, pain, and marked inflammation of the eye. Conjunctival cultures and slides for Gram staining should be obtained if gonococcal infection is a possibility. In these cases, the choice of antibiotic is guided by the results of laboratory tests. Methicillin-resistant *S. aureus* has been isolated with increasing frequency from patients with bacterial conjunctivitis. Increasing colonization of MRSA has been found in nursing home residents, and the incidence of community-acquired MRSA infections also has risen. Methicillin-resistant *S. aureus* organisms are resistant to many commercially available topical antibiotics. An epidemiologic study found that infants within the neonatal intensive care setting due to low birth weight and/or low gestational age have an increased incidence of gram-negative conjunctivitis that is often resistant to gentamicin.
Microbiology laboratory testing may guide therapy, which may include compounded topical antibiotics such as vancomycin (see Bacterial Keratitis).
## Gonococcal Conjunctivitis
Systemic antibiotic therapy is necessary to treat gonococcal conjunctivitis (see Appendix 4). Saline lavage may promote comfort and more rapid resolution of inflammation. If there is corneal involvement, topical treatment as for bacterial keratitis (see Bacterial Keratitis PPP319) should be added. Patients and sexual contacts should be informed about the possibility of concomitant disease and referred appropriately. Sexual abuse should be considered in children with gonococcal or Chlamydia infections.
Patients with gonococcal conjunctivitis should be seen daily until resolution of the conjunctivitis. At each follow-up visit, an interval history, visual acuity measurement, and slit-lamp biomicroscopy should be performed. For other types of bacterial conjunctivitis, patients should be advised to return for a visit in 3 to 4 days if they note no improvement. *Neisseria meningitis* should be eliminated as the causative organism before concluding that *N. gonorrhoeae* is responsible.
## Chlamydial Conjunctivitis
Appendix 4 provides recommendations for the treatment of chlamydial conjunctivitis. Because more than 50% of infants with chlamydial conjunctivitis may also be infected at other sites such as the nasopharynx, genital tract, or lungs, systemic therapy is indicated.320 Empiric antibiotic therapy can be considered in patients with symptoms and signs highly suggestive of chlamydia (e.g., follicular conjunctivitis that persists for several weeks).
There are no data to support the use of topical therapy in addition to systemic therapy. Because the incidence of treatment failure can be as high as 19%,104 patients should be re-evaluated following treatment. The follow-up visit should consist of an interval history, visual acuity measurement, and slit-lamp biomicroscopy. Adult conjunctivitis usually responds to systemic therapy, and sexual contacts should be treated at the same time. Patients and sexual contacts should be informed about the possibility of concomitant disease and should be referred appropriately. Sexual abuse should be considered in children with this condition. In low- to middle-income countries where antibiotic access is limited, povidone-iodine 1.25% ophthalmic solution can be used to treat chlamydial conjunctivitis.311
## Vasculitis
When a diagnosis of vasculitis is confirmed, topical/periocular steroids may be considered in cases of unilateral ocular involvement. Bilateral ocular involvement, advanced vision loss, and/or systemic comorbidities often necessitate systemic treatment with corticosteroids, antimetabolites, calcineurin inhibitors,321 biologics,322 or intravenous immunoglobulins.323 Notably, infectious causes must be ruled out before considering immunosuppression.
## Ligneous Conjunctivitis
Ligneous conjunctivitis is caused by plasminogen deficiency resulting in pseudomembranous disease of mucous membranes in the mouth, nasopharynx, trachea, and female genital tract. This chronic childhood membranous conjunctivitis has been treated successfully using intravenous lysplasminogen324 or topical plasminogen drops,325 or by surgical excision with immediate anticoagulation and immunosuppression.326
## PROVIDER AND SETTING
Because there is a spectrum of etiologies and treatment, optimal diagnosis and management of conjunctivitis require broad medical skills and experience. Some types of conjunctivitis are associated with systemic diseases and may require systemic drug treatment.
Patients with conjunctivitis should be evaluated by an ophthalmologist in the following circumstances:
- Visual loss
- Moderate or severe pain
- Severe, purulent discharge
- Corneal involvement
- Conjunctival scarring
- Lack of response to therapy
- Recurrent episodes
- History of HSV eye disease
- History of immunocompromise
Most patients with conjunctivitis can be treated effectively in an outpatient setting. In children with acute bacterial conjunctivitis, consideration might be given to referral for an internal ear exam. Hospitalization may be necessary to administer parenteral therapy for severe gonococcal conjunctivitis and is mandatory for neonatal conjunctivitis.¹⁰
### COUNSELING AND REFERRAL
Counseling is imperative for all contagious varieties of conjunctivitis to minimize or prevent spread of the disease in the community. Modes of transmission include eye-hand contact, sexual contact, exposure to contaminated droplets, and exposure to airborne pathogens. Hand washing is important to reduce the risk of transmission of infection. Return to school or work depends on the age of the patient, occupation, and type and severity of conjunctivitis.
When conjunctivitis is associated with sexually transmitted disease, treatment of sexual partners is essential to minimize recurrence and spread of the disease. Patients as well as their sexual partners should be referred to an appropriate medical specialist. The physician must remain alert to the possibility of child abuse in cases of potentially sexually transmitted ocular disease in children. In many states, sexually transmitted diseases and suspected child abuse must be reported to local health authorities or other state agencies.
In cases of ophthalmia neonatorum due to gonococcus, chlamydia, and HSV, the infant should be referred to an appropriate specialist. Infants who require systemic treatment are best managed in conjunction with a pediatrician.
When conjunctivitis appears to be a manifestation of systemic disease, patients should be referred to an appropriate medical specialist for evaluation.
### SOCIOECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
Conjunctivitis is very common worldwide, and it has a broad spectrum of disease severity and underlying etiologies.
#### Allergic Conjunctivitis
Allergic conjunctivitis alone has been estimated to occur in 6% to 40% of the general population and symptoms are noted in 30% to 71% of patients with allergic rhinitis.³²⁷-³²⁹ There have been multiple studies that have examined how allergic conjunctivitis causes a reduction in quality of life³³⁰-³³³ and increases economic costs.³³¹,³³³-³³⁵ The costs include not only direct costs such as doctors’ visits and medications but also indirect costs such as missed days from work and school, and decreased productivity while at work.³³⁶
Higher socioeconomic position or type 1 diabetes may be related to increased risk of developing allergies.³³⁷,³³⁸ In countries with high rates of allergic diseases, it has been noted that children who had recently immigrated may have a protective premigration environment that results in a lower prevalence of asthma, conjunctivitis, and eczema.
An observational cross-sectional study on allergic rhinitis in four European countries showed that the presence of ocular symptoms reduces quality of life, reduces work productivity, and increases resource utilization regardless of the severity of nasal symptoms.³³¹ Another cross-sectional study looked at patients diagnosed with allergic conjunctivitis in 16 ophthalmology departments in Portugal. It found that 59% of patients had year-round symptoms, and that 46% had significant impairment in their quality of life during an acute episode.³³² Chronic allergic rhinitis/conjunctivitis is also a common disease among children.³³⁴ Among students with nasal and ocular symptoms, 42%, 24%, 36%, and 28% reported moderate to severe interference of daily activities, at least 1 day of absence from school, a visit to a health care professional, and drug usage for rhinitis, respectively. The total number of prescriptions written for ocular allergy increased by 20% per year between 1996 and 2005.³³⁹ Expenditure on treatment grew from an
## Bacterial Conjunctivitis
The economic impact of bacterial conjunctivitis is also substantial. A study was performed on a single outbreak of pneumococcal conjunctivitis at Dartmouth College in 2002 that affected 698 students. Even though the course of the disease was very short and there were no long-term ocular sequelae, the estimated cost, including doctors’ visits, cultures, and antibiotics, ranged from $66,468 to $120,583. Another study looked at the entire country using data from the medical literature, existing national databases, and Current Procedural Terminology codes. The estimated number of cases of bacterial conjunctivitis in the United States in 2005 was 4 million, and the total direct and indirect cost of treating patients with bacterial conjunctivitis was $589 million. Data on costs associated with missed work or school, as well as the economic impact of untreated bacterial conjunctivitis, are not available.
## Adenoviral Conjunctivitis
Antibiotics are not indicated in the treatment of adenoviral conjunctivitis yet are frequently prescribed. In one retrospective study, 60% of patients diagnosed with adenoviral conjunctivitis filled antibiotic prescriptions, and one of five of these were for antibiotic-steroid combination drops, which are typically contraindicated in acute conjunctivitis. Prescriptions were given more often if an optometrist, urgent care physician, or primary care provider rather than an ophthalmologist made the initial diagnosis. Antibiotic prescriptions were also more likely to be filled by white, affluent, and/or educated patients. These practices contribute to avoidable increased health care costs and may promote antibiotic resistance.
Even though adenoviral conjunctivitis is a common condition that often results in several missed days of work/school and can lead to painful and visually debilitating keratoconjunctivitis, there are not yet any published studies on its overall economic impact in the general population. A single outbreak of adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis in a long-term care facility in 2000, which affected 29 residents and 12 staff, resulted in hospital costs of $29,527 ($10,885 for medical costs, $8210 for investigative costs, $3048 for preventive measures, and $17,184 for lost productivity). In 2018, a study looking at a breakout of adenovirus in a neonatal intensive care unit setting affecting 52 neonates and 59 neonatal intensive care unit healthcare workers estimated the total cost related to containment and productivity losses to be $205,000. Preventive infection-control measures can be extremely cost-effective if such an outbreak is avoided. There are quick point-of-care tests for adenovirus; however, some studies show a low sensitivity limiting its potential utility.
## Ocular Surface Squamous Neoplasia
Outcomes of medical versus surgical treatment in patients with ocular surface squamous neoplasia have been found to be equally efficacious. Socioeconomic considerations do play a role in treatment decision-making. In 2019, Al Bayyat et al noted that out-of-pocket costs for
Fluorouracil and mitomycin-C cost $38 to $75 and $100 to $200 per bottle, respectively. For patients with limited access to care, logistical considerations and the additive cost of chronic medical therapy versus potentially curative surgical therapy should be considered.
## APPENDIX 1. QUALITY OF OPHTHALMIC CARE CORE CRITERIA
*Providing quality care*
*is the physician's foremost ethical obligation, and is*
*the basis of public trust in physicians.*
**AMA Board of Trustees, 1986**
Quality ophthalmic care is provided in a manner and with the skill that is consistent with the best interests of the patient. The discussion that follows characterizes the core elements of such care.
The ophthalmologist is first and foremost a physician. As such, the ophthalmologist demonstrates compassion and concern for the individual, and utilizes the science and art of medicine to help alleviate patient fear and suffering. The ophthalmologist strives to develop and maintain clinical skills at the highest feasible level, consistent with the needs of patients, through training and continuing education. The ophthalmologist evaluates those skills and medical knowledge in relation to the needs of the patient and responds accordingly. The ophthalmologist also ensures that needy patients receive necessary care directly or through referral to appropriate persons and facilities that will provide such care, and he or she supports activities that promote health and prevent disease and disability.
The ophthalmologist recognizes that disease places patients in a disadvantaged, dependent state. The ophthalmologist respects the dignity and integrity of his or her patients and does not exploit their vulnerability.
Quality ophthalmic care has the following optional attributes, among others.
- **The essence of quality care** is a meaningful partnership relationship between patient and physician. The ophthalmologist strives to communicate effectively with his or her patients, listening carefully to their needs and concerns. In turn, the ophthalmologist educates his or her patients about the nature and prognosis of their condition and about proper and appropriate therapeutic modalities. This is to ensure their meaningful participation (appropriate to their unique physical, intellectual and emotional state) in decisions affecting their management and care, to improve their motivation and compliance with the agreed plan of treatment, and to help alleviate their fears and concerns.
- The ophthalmologist uses his or her best judgment in choosing and timing appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic modalities as well as the frequency of evaluation and follow-up, with due regard to the urgency and nature of the patient's condition and unique needs and desires.
- The ophthalmologist carries out only those procedures for which he or she is adequately trained, experienced and competent, or, when necessary, is assisted by someone who is, depending on the urgency of the problem and availability and accessibility of alternative providers.
- **Patients are assured access to, and continuity of, needed and appropriate ophthalmic care**, which can be described as follows.
  - The ophthalmologist treats patients with due regard to timeliness, appropriateness, and his or her own ability to provide such care.
  - The operating ophthalmologist makes adequate provision for appropriate pre- and postoperative patient care.
  - When the ophthalmologist is unavailable for his or her patient, he or she provides appropriate alternate ophthalmic care, with adequate mechanisms for informing patients of the existence of such care and procedures for obtaining it.
  - The ophthalmologist refers patients to other ophthalmologists and eye care providers based on the timeliness and appropriateness of such referral, the patient's needs, the competence and qualifications of the person to whom the referral is made, and access and availability.
  - The ophthalmologist seeks appropriate consultation with due regard to the nature of the ocular or other medical or surgical problem. Consultants are suggested for their skill, competence, and accessibility. They receive a complete and accurate an accounting of the problem as necessary to provide efficient and effective advice or intervention, and in turn respond in an adequate and timely manner.
  - The ophthalmologist maintains complete and accurate medical records.
  - On appropriate request, the ophthalmologist provides a full and accurate rendering of the patient's records in his or her possession.
- The ophthalmologist reviews the results of consultations and laboratory tests in a timely and effective manner and takes appropriate actions.
- The ophthalmologist and those who assist in providing care identify themselves and their profession.
- For patients whose conditions fail to respond to treatment and for whom further treatment is unavailable, the ophthalmologist provides proper professional support, counseling, rehabilitative and social services, and referral as appropriate and accessible.
- Prior to therapeutic or invasive diagnostic procedures, the ophthalmologist becomes appropriately conversant with the patient's condition by collecting pertinent historical information and performing relevant preoperative examinations. Additionally, he or she enables the patient to reach a fully informed decision by providing an accurate and truthful explanation of the diagnosis; the nature, purpose, risks, benefits, and probability of success of the proposed treatment and of alternative treatment; and the risks and benefits of no treatment.
- The ophthalmologist adopts new technology (e.g., drugs, devices, surgical techniques) in judicious fashion, appropriate to the cost and potential benefit relative to existing alternatives and to its demonstrated safety and efficacy.
- The ophthalmologist enhances the quality of care he or she provides by periodically reviewing and assessing his or her personal performance in relation to established standards, and by revising or altering his or her practices and techniques appropriately.
- The ophthalmologist improves ophthalmic care by communicating to colleagues, through appropriate professional channels, knowledge gained through clinical research and practice. This includes alerting colleagues of instances of unusual or unexpected rates of complications and problems related to new drugs, devices or procedures.
- The ophthalmologist provides care in suitably staffed and equipped facilities adequate to deal with potential ocular and systemic complications requiring immediate attention.
- The ophthalmologist also provides ophthalmic care in a manner that is cost effective without unacceptably compromising accepted standards of quality.
### Reviewed by:
Council
### Approved by:
Board of Trustees
October 12, 1988
- **2nd Printing**: January 1991
- **3rd Printing**: August 2001
- **4th Printing**: July 2005
## APPENDIX 2. INTERNATIONAL STATISTICAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES AND RELATED HEALTH PROBLEMS (ICD) CODES
Conjunctivitis includes entities with the following ICD-10 classifications:
| **Condition**                                                                                     | **ICD-10 CM Code**                                               |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Conjunctivitis, other diseases of conjunctiva caused by viruses                                    | Code first underlying virus or chemical and intent                |
|                                                                                                    | H10.011 – H10.813 (approximately 65 codes in this range)         |
| **Chlamydia**                                                                                     | A74.0, B30.0 – B30.9                                             |
| and                                                                                               |                                                                   |
| **Ophthalmia neonatorum caused by gonococcus**                                                    | A54.31                                                           |
| Blepharoconjunctivitis                                                                            | H10.50-, H10.51-, H10.53-                                       |
| Zika virus                                                                                        | A92.5                                                            |
| Ligneous                                                                                          | H10.51-                                                          |
| Measles                                                                                           | B05.81                                                           |
| Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis                                                                  | H10.45                                                           |
| Vernal conjunctivitis                                                                             | H10.44                                                           |
| Atopic conjunctivitis                                                                             | H10.1-                                                           |
| Giant papillary conjunctivitis (GPC), which also has a mechanical component                       | H10.41-                                                          |
| Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis (SLK)                                                        | H16.29-                                                          |
| Contact lens–related keratoconjunctivitis                                                         | H12.89                                                           |
| Floppy eyelid syndrome                                                                            | H02.89                                                           |
| Giant fornix syndrome                                                                             | H16.29- (other keratoconjunctivitis)                            |
| Pediculosis palpebrarum (*Phthirus pubis*)                                                        | H44.52-                                                          |
| Medication-induced keratoconjunctivitis                                                          | H10.40- (unspecified chronic conjunctivitis)                    |
| Conjunctival chalasis                                                                             | H11.82-                                                          |
| Adenoviral conjunctivitis                                                                         | B30.1                                                            |
| Herpes simplex virus (HSV) conjunctivitis                                                        | B00.53                                                           |
| Varicella (herpes) zoster virus (VZV) conjunctivitis                                              | B02.31                                                           |
| Molluscum contagiosum                                                                             | B08.1                                                            |
| Bacterial conjunctivitis (including nongonococcal and gonococcal)                                 | H10.89                                                           |
| Chlamydial conjunctivitis                                                                         | A74.0                                                            |
| Ocular mucous membrane pemphigoid (OMMP)                                                         | L12.1                                                            |
| Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)                                                                  | D89.810, D89.811, D89.812                                       |
| Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS)/toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN)                                   | L51.3                                                            |
| SARS-COVID 19                                                                                     | U07.1                                                            |
### Notes:
- **CM**: Clinical Modification used in the United States
- **ICD**: International Classification of Diseases
- (1 = right eye; 2 = left eye; 3 = bilateral)
- Certain ICD-10 CM categories have applicable 7th characters. The applicable 7th character is required for all codes within the category, or as the notes in the Tabular List instruct. The 7th character must always be the 7th character in the data field. If a code that requires a 7th character is not 6 characters, a placeholder X must be used to fill in the empty characters.
- For bilateral sites, the final character of the codes in the ICD-10 CM indicates laterality. If no bilateral code is provided and the condition is bilateral, separate codes for both the left and right side should be assigned. Unspecified codes should only be used when there is no other code option available.
- When the diagnosis code specifies laterality, regardless of which digit it is found in (i.e., 4th digit, 5th digit, or 6th digit):
  - Right is always 1
  - Left is always 2
  - Bilateral is always 3
## APPENDIX 3. OCULAR SURFACE DYE STAINING
Fluorescein, rose bengal, or lissamine green dyes may be used to assess the ocular surface.
Fluorescein dye stains areas of the corneal and conjunctival epithelium where there is inefficient disruption of intercellular junctions to allow the dye to permeate into the tissue.³⁵¹ Saline-moistened fluorescein strips or 1% to 2% sodium fluorescein solution are used to stain the tear film. After instilling the dye, the ocular surface is examined through a biomicroscope using a cobalt blue filter. Staining may become more apparent after 1 to 2 minutes. Staining is more intense when it is observed using a yellow filter. Mild fluorescein staining can be observed in normal eyes and may be more prominent in the morning. Exposure-zone punctate or blotchy fluorescein staining is observed in dry eye, and staining is more easily visualized on the cornea than on the conjunctiva.
Rose bengal dye stains ocular surface cells that lack a mucous coating as well as debris in the tear film,³⁵¹ and this staining may be easier to observe with a red-free filter (green filter). Rose bengal staining of the tear film may be performed using a saline-moistened strip or 1% solution. (Patients should be informed that the drop might irritate the eye.) The saline drop used to moisten the strip should remain in contact with the strip for at least a minute to achieve an adequate concentration of rose bengal to stain the ocular surface. Rose bengal staining is more intense on the conjunctiva than on the cornea. Rose bengal has antiviral properties and may affect herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) culture results. It is also helpful when delineating the margins of ocular surface neoplasms.³⁵²
Lissamine green dye has a staining profile similar to that of rose bengal³⁵³ and may cause less ocular irritation.³⁵³ It is more useful for observing conjunctival staining and is not recommended for evaluating corneal epithelial disease.
Diffuse corneal and conjunctival staining is commonly seen in viral keratoconjunctivitis and medicamentosa. Staining of the inferior cornea and bulbar conjunctiva is typically observed in patients with staphylococcal blepharitis, meibomian gland dysfunction, lagophthalmos, and exposure, whereas staining of the superior bulbar conjunctiva is typically seen in superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis. A pattern of exposure zone (interpalpebral) corneal and bulbar conjunctival staining is typically seen with dry eye disease.³⁵⁴, ³⁵⁵
## Appendix 4. Systemic Antibiotic Therapy for Gonococcal and Chlamydial Conjunctivitis
####### Table A4-1: Systemic Antibiotic Therapy for Gonococcal and Chlamydial Conjunctivitis
| Cause            | Drug of Choice                                                                 | Dosage                     |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|
| Adults and Adolescents                                                                                                     |
| Gonococcus*      | Ceftriaxone†                                                                  | 500 mg IM, single dose     |
|                  | and Azithromycin                                                              | 1 g orally, single dose    |
|                  | or Doxycycline                                                                | 100 mg orally, twice a day for 7 days |
| **For cephalosporin-allergic patients:**                                                                                  |
|                  | Azithromycin‡                                                                 | 2 g orally, single dose    |
|                  | plus Gentamicin                                                               | 240 mg IM, single dose     |
| **For ceftriaxone administration is not available or not feasible:**                                                                  |
|                  | Cefixime                                                                      | 800 mg orally, single dose |
| **For pregnant patients:**                                                                                                 |
|                  | Ceftriaxone                                                                   | 500 mg IM, single dose     |
| **For disseminated gonococcal infections:**                                                                                |
|                  | Ceftriaxone                                                                   | 1 g IM or intravenous every 24 hours |
|                  | or Cefotaxime                                                                 | 1 g by intravenous every 8 hours |
|                  | or Ceftizoxime                                                                | 1 g every 8 hours          |
## Table A4-1: Systemic Antibiotic Therapy for Gonococcal and Chlamydial Conjunctivitis
| Cause                                      | Drug of Choice                                | Dosage                                                                                  |
|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Chlamydia**                              | Azithromycin                                  | 1 g orally, single dose                                                                |
|                                            | or                                           |                                                                                        |
|                                            | Doxycycline                                   | 100 mg orally twice a day for 7 days                                                   |
|                                            | or                                           |                                                                                        |
|                                            | Levofloxacin                                  | 500 mg orally once a day for 7 days                                                    |
|                                            |                                              |                                                                                        |
|                                            | For pregnant patients:                       |                                                                                        |
|                                            | Azithromycin                                  | 1 g orally, single dose                                                                |
|                                            | or                                           |                                                                                        |
|                                            | Amoxicillin                                   | 500 mg orally three times a day for 7 days                                             |
| **Children (<18 years)**                   |                                              |                                                                                        |
| **Gonococcus**                            |                                              |                                                                                        |
| Children who weigh ≤45 kg                  | Ceftriaxone                                   | 25–50 mg/kg body weight intravenous or IM, single dose, not to exceed 250 mg           |
| Children who weigh >45 kg                  | Same treatment as adults                     |                                                                                        |
| **Chlamydia**                             |                                              |                                                                                        |
| Infants and children who weigh <45 kg      | Erythromycin base or ethylsuccinate          | 50 mg/kg body weight/day orally divided into four doses a day for 14 days              |
| (nasopharynx, urogenital, and rectal)      |                                              |                                                                                        |
| Children who weigh ≥45 kg but are aged <8 | Azithromycin                                  | 1 g orally, single dose                                                                |
| years (nasopharynx, urogenital, and rectal)|                                              |                                                                                        |
| Children ≥8 years                          | Azithromycin                                  | 1 g orally, single dose                                                                |
|                                            | or                                           |                                                                                        |
|                                            | Doxycycline                                   | 100 mg orally, twice a day for 7 days                                                  |
| **Neonates**                               |                                              |                                                                                        |
| Ophthalmia neonatorum caused by *N. gonorrhoeae* | Ceftriaxone                                   | 25–50 mg intravenous or IM, single dose, not to exceed 250 mg                          |
| Ocular prophylaxis in neonates             | Erythromycin                                  | 0.5% ophthalmic ointment in each eye in a single application at birth                  |
#### TABLE A4-1 Systemic Antibiotic Therapy for Gonococcal and Chlamydial Conjunctivitis
| Cause       | Drug of Choice                                                                                                           | Dosage                                |
|-------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| For neonates unable to receive ceftriaxone due to simultaneous administration of intravenous calcium:                               | Cefotaxime                                                                 | 100 mg/kg body weight intravenous or IM, single dose  |
| Chlamydia   | Erythromycin base or ethylsuccinate                                                                                     | 50 mg/kg body weight/day orally divided into four doses a day for 14 days** |
|             | or                                                                                                                      |                                       |
|             | Azithromycin suspension                                                                                                 | 20 mg/kg body weight/day orally once a day for 3 days |
### Notes:
- **Pregnant women should not be treated with doxycycline, quinolones, or tetracyclines.** Either erythromycin or amoxicillin is recommended for treatment of chlamydia during pregnancy.
### Data from:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2021. *MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.* 2021;70 (No. RR-4)
### Footnotes:
- **\*** The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) currently recommends that patients treated for gonococcal infection also be treated routinely with a regimen effective against uncomplicated genital *Chlamydia trachomatis* infection, because patients infected with *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* often are coinfected with *C. trachomatis*.
- **†** If ceftriaxone is not available, cefixime 400 mg in a single dose or doxycycline 100 mg orally, twice a day for 7 days may be used. Consider lavage of infected eyes with saline solution once.
- **‡** A single oral dose of azithromycin 2 g is effective against uncomplicated gonococcal infections, but the CDC does not recommend widespread use of azithromycin because of concerns over emerging antimicrobial resistance to macrolides. Because data are limited regarding alternative regimens for treating gonorrhea among persons who have severe cephalosporin allergy, providers treating such patients should consult infectious disease specialists.
- **§** The CDC recommends advising all women and men with chlamydial or gonococcal infection to be retested approximately 3 months after treatment.
- **\|** Sexual abuse must be considered a cause of infection in preadolescent children. A diagnosis of *C. trachomatis* or *N. gonorrhoeae* infection in preadolescent children should be documented by standard culture.
- **¶** Spectinomycin is not available in the United States; updated information from the CDC on the availability of spectinomycin will be available at [www.cdc.gov/std/treatment](http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment).
- **\*\*** An association between oral erythromycin and infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis has been reported in infants aged less than 6 weeks who were treated with this drug. Infants treated with erythromycin should be followed for signs and symptoms of infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.
## LITERATURE SEARCHES FOR THIS PPP
Literature searches of the PubMed database were conducted on March 3, 2022; the search strategies are listed below. Specific limited update searches were conducted on June 7, 2023. The searches had added filters for human, English-language randomized controlled trials and systematic reviews and date limiters to capture literature published since June 27, 2018. The panel analyzed 1,906 studies of which 65 were included in the PPP. The literature searches with the disease condition and the search term, patient values and patient preferences didn’t yield results. The literature searches for economic evaluation and treatment cost yielded 1 study which was provided to the panel, and which was included in the PPP.
### Conjunctivitis
*(conjunctivitis[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, allergic[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, bacterial[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, viral[majr:noexp] OR keratoconjunctivitis[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis[tiab] OR keratoconjunctivitis[tiab])*
### Epidemiology
*(conjunctivitis/epidemiology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, allergic/epidemiology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, bacterial/epidemiology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, viral/epidemiology[majr:noexp] OR keratoconjunctivitis/epidemiology[majr:noexp])*
### Risk Factors
*(conjunctivitis[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, allergic[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, bacterial[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, viral[majr:noexp] OR keratoconjunctivitis[majr:noexp]) AND (risk factors[MeSH Terms])*
### Contact Lenses
*(conjunctivitis[mh:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, allergic[mh:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, bacterial[mh:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, viral[mh:noexp] OR keratoconjunctivitis[mh:noexp]) AND (contact lenses[mh])*
### Etiology
*(conjunctivitis/etiology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, allergic/etiology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, bacterial/etiology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, viral/etiology[majr:noexp] OR keratoconjunctivitis/etiology[majr:noexp])*
### Pathology/Physiology/Physiopathology
*(conjunctivitis/pathology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis/physiology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis/physiopathology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, allergic/pathology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, allergic/physiopathology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, allergic/physiology[mh] OR conjunctivitis, bacterial/pathology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, bacterial/physiopathology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, bacterial/physiology[mh] OR conjunctivitis, viral/pathology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, viral/physiopathology[majr:noexp] OR conjunctivitis, viral/physiology[mh] OR keratoconjunctivitis/pathology[majr:noexp] OR keratoconjunctivitis/physiology[majr:noexp] OR keratoconjunctivitis/physiopathology[majr:noexp])*
### Cost of Illness
*"conjunctivitis"[tiab] AND ("cost of illness"[MeSH Terms] OR "cost benefit analysis"[MeSH Terms])*
### Patient Values
*conjunctivitis[tiab] AND (patient values[tiab] OR patient preferences[tiab])*
## Identification of studies via PubMed
### Identification
- **Records identified through PubMed search**:
  (n = 1,906)
### Screening
- **Records screened and assessed for eligibility**:
  (n = 1,906)
- **Records excluded**:
  (n = 1,842)
### Included
- **Studies included in Conjunctivitis Preferred Practice Pattern**:
  (n = 64)
*From*: Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ 2021;372:n71. doi: 10.1136/bmj.n71
*For more information, visit*: [http://www.prisma-statement.org/](http://www.prisma-statement.org/)
## RELATED ACADEMY MATERIALS
**Basic and Clinical Science Course**
External Disease and Cornea (Section 8, 2023-2024)
**Patient Education Brochure**
Conjunctivitis (2023)
**Preferred Practice Pattern Guidelines – Free download available at [www.aao.org/ppp](http://www.aao.org/ppp).**
Comprehensive Adult Medical Eye Evaluation (2020)