## COMMENTARY
## Consensus Statement on Visual Rehabilitation in Mild Traumatic Brain Injury
Prem S. Subramanian, MD, PhD, Jason S. Barton, MD, Paul Ranalli, MD, Craig Smith, MD, Courtney E. Francis, MD, and Benjamin Friberg, MD
*Neurology: Clinical Practice December 2022 vol. 12 no. 6 422-428 doi:10.1212/CPJ.0000000000200071*
### Abstract
Optometric visual rehabilitation therapy has been used for a variety of visual disorders. Descriptively named entities such as posttrauma visual syndrome, visual midline shift syndrome, and vertical heterophoria syndrome are frequently diagnosed by neuro-optometrists and/or behavioral optometrists in patients after stroke or head injury or in the setting of dizziness and/or headache. The scientific underpinnings of these diagnoses and treatments are weak, and published clinical studies comprise case reports and case series without comparison to control populations. Neuro-ophthalmologists are frequently questioned by patients about the utility of such treatment strategies. Many ophthalmologists and neurologists also are involved in the care of patients who carry these diagnoses and undergo these visual therapies. Involved physicians may benefit from guidance about the rationale, evidence, and level of evidence for the efficacy of these therapeutic approaches.
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a major cause of disability and death globally, and the associated cost continues to rise. Mild TBI (mTBI) can be even more problematic than moderate or severe TBI from both an economic and diagnostic standpoint. In moderate and severe TBI, the brain damage is obvious, but in mTBI, the damage is more subtle yet may still lead to both short- and long-term neurologic dysfunction. The terms concussion and mTBI often are used interchangeably, and repeated concussions, as might occur in sports or in the military, can lead to an aggregation of disability. An estimated 42 million people worldwide have a concussion every year. Although vehicular and industrial accidents are the most common causes of mTBI in adults, sports and bicycle accidents account for the majority of cases among 5- to 14-year-olds, usually from a fall.
Concussion is most frequently diagnosed and treated in acute care settings such as the emergency department or primary care office by physicians or advanced practitioners. Later, the diagnosis is perpetuated during follow-up with primary care physicians, neurologists, chiropractors, physical and occupational therapists, speech-language pathologists, and psychologists, leading to recommendations for tertiary levels of care with neurorehabilitative specialists (e.g., neuropsychologists, neurologists, neuro/behavioral optometrists, speech-language pathologists, and brain injury rehabilitation centers). For these latter care providers, the initial observations of injury, patient’s response to injury, and symptoms immediately following the injury are essential information for establishing an appropriate diagnosis.
Departments of Ophthalmology, Neurology, and Neurosurgery (PSS), University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO; Sue Anschutz-Rodgers University of Colorado Eye Center (PSS), Aurora, CO; Department of Surgery Division of Ophthalmology (JSB), Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD; Departments of Medicine (PR/CS), Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Psychology (BRF), University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada; Departments of Medicine (Neurology) (CEF), RPB, University of Washington, Seattle; Department of Medicine (CS), University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle; Departments of Ophthalmology and Neurology (BRF), University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle; Department of Neuroscience (BRF), University of California San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego; and The Neurology Center (BRF), Carlsbad, CA.
Funding information and disclosures are provided at the end of the article. Full disclosure form information provided by the authors is available with the full text of this article at Neurology.org/cp.
## Visual Diagnoses in mTBI
Despite the advances in diagnostic imaging and disease-specific biomarkers over the past several decades, the diagnosis of mTBI remains a clinical one. Coupled with the often-confusing diagnostic taxonomy and heterogeneity in the case definitions of mTBI, this leads to costly and inaccurate under- and over-diagnoses. This imprecision may obscure the differentiation of functional neurologic disorders and/or even enable malingering in injuries involving liability, which in turn may lead to unwarranted studies and treatments that lead to excessive health care costs and potential harm.
This consensus statement will focus on the commonly accepted elements that define the entity of mTBI from the World Health Organization Collaborating Task Force and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention definition of mTBI:
> mTBI is an acute brain injury resulting from mechanical energy to the head from external physical forces. Operational criteria for clinical identification include: (1) one or more of the following: confusion or disorientation, loss of consciousness for 30 minutes or less, post-traumatic amnesia for less than 24 hours, and/or other transient neurological abnormalities such as focal signs, seizure, and intracranial lesions not requiring surgery; and (2) Glasgow Coma Scale of 13-15 after 30 minutes post-injury or later upon presentation for healthcare. (3) These manifestations of mTBI must not be due to drugs, alcohol medications, caused by other injuries or treatment for other injuries (e.g., psychological trauma, language barrier, or coexisting medical conditions) or caused by penetrating cranial injury.
The economic burden of mTBI extends beyond morbidity, disability, and mortality and includes varied facets of treatment labor costs, and effects on the fabric of the family and society. The financial cost may be staggering, yet poorly documented. For example, visual rehabilitation given to injured workers in Washington State over an 8-year period for a diagnosis of convergence insufficiency (CI), a common symptom in mTBI, costs the system $250,000 annually. In this cohort, independent examination by 1 author (C.S.) found that less than half of those treated actually had CI, and in that same period, only 18% of a consecutive cohort of 782 patients diagnosed with mTBI actually met the World Health Organization criteria for the disorder. Although VR is a small component of the package of mTBI treatment paradigms, this example illustrates that a significant amount of the resources directed at treating CI may be misdirected.
The purpose of this work is to review the current status of evidence regarding diagnosis and management of visual disorders in mTBI and to propose future work that will improve our care of patients with mTBI. We searched the English language literature using PubMed and used search terms that combined optometric vision therapy and TBI to identify a broad range of existing publications and reports.
### Efferent Visual Diagnoses in mTBI
Disorders of ocular alignment and coordination of binocular movement may be a defining feature of acute mTBI, as evidenced by research and subsequent development of tests that seek to permit rapid and reliable diagnosis of mTBI immediately after head trauma. These abnormalities usually remit within weeks, but subjects with mTBI may have ongoing symptoms including diplopia and dizziness for which the exact cause may be unclear. If assessment of ocular motor dysfunction is used in both the definition of mTBI and to suggest recovery from it, this presents a potential outcome in determining the value of an oculomotor rehabilitation treatment.
#### Diplopia
Diplopia is described frequently by subjects after mTBI, and trauma is among the most common causes of diplopia, potentially affecting cranial nerves, extracranial muscles, vergence, and supranuclear pathways associated with ocular alignment (Table). In mTBI, the incidence of direct injury to these structures is very low. Nonetheless, injury to any of the ocular motor nerves (cranial nerves [CNs] III, IV, and VI) may occur, although it has been suggested that CN VI is more susceptible to relatively minor trauma than CNs III and IV. Although CN injuries are rare in mTBI, diplopia has been reported by over 40% of US military veterans who had an mTBI from blast or nonblast causes; thus, although a supranuclear disturbance of ocular motor function is suspected, the precise location of the dysfunction is not known. Many subjects with mTBI with diplopia may have normal eye movements and small angles of strabismus, including phorias, that are better appreciated with Maddox rod testing than with prism cover evaluation. Ocular motor alignment is important for optimal performance of many daily activities, such as self-care, reading, spatial awareness, limb coordination, postural control, and navigation. Correlation of diplopia with other TBI symptoms such as photophobia, blurred vision, and difficulty reading has not been demonstrated, and afferent symptoms and diplopia symptoms do not always resolve in conjunction.
#### TABLE Efferent Visual Complications of Traumatic Brain Injury
| Complication     | Diplopia                                                                                                           | Saccadic Dysfunction                                  |
|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Possible Mechanism | - Orbital/extraocular muscle injuries from blunt or penetrating trauma <br> - Cranial nerve palsies from acceleration/deceleration injury, cavernous sinus hemorrhage, or trauma <br> - E-convergence insufficiency from mild diffuse axonal injury or other mTBI-related whip-lash processes | - Saccadic hypometria from vestibulo-ocular disturbances |
## Convergence Insufficiency
As noted, CI is said to be present in about a third of patients with mTBI,12 and some reading difficulties (an afferent symptom) in mTBI may reflect CI. Among the major unanswered questions about this vergence problem are the duration of symptoms and identifying predictors of recovery. Studies of civilian and military subjects with TBI demonstrate that the most will have symptom improvement or resolution within 6 months, but a subset will have persistent symptoms that continue to cause functional deficits. Identifying this subpopulation remains difficult, and no tools have been developed that reliably predict recovery of vergence. Finding parameters connected to poor recovery may allow for early identification of patients who need treatment while allowing those who are likely to improve spontaneously to avoid the time and expense of treatments, should they prove to be effective.
## Dizziness and Imbalance
Other areas of reported dysfunction are saccadic dysmetria and vestibular disorders (Table). Patients may exhibit fatigable saccadic accuracy, and increased saccadic latency has been proposed as a characteristic sign. It is not clear whether these findings reflect ocular motor dysfunction or broader issues with fatigue and attention. It is also not clear (and perhaps unlikely) that they are directly responsible for any visual symptoms, as neurologists frequently observe similar, asymptomatic saccadic abnormalities in patients with nontraumatic neurologic diseases. Nystagmus is rare in mTBI, but dizziness is common and may have a variety of causes.13 A subset of patients who experience dizziness will report symptoms being triggered by complex visual environments and/or rapid motion within the field of view, and this condition may represent persistent postural-perceptual dizziness.14
## Potential Relationship to Blast Injury
Whether the likelihood of visual and ocular motor dysfunction varies with the type of injury remains to be determined. One potentially important subgroup is that of blast injuries, often seen in the military. Nearly 80% of US military personnel mTBIs incurred during post-9/11 deployments were related to blast, and blast exposure results in more diffuse brain injury compared with non–blast-related mTBI.15 Blast thus may lead to a greater multifocal effect on the brain structures associated with ocular motor control (e.g., frontal and prefrontal cortices and cerebellum). Although there have been editorial opinions in academic journals calling for treatment of these problems, a lack of mechanistic understanding hampers our ability to prescribe directed and proven effective therapies.
## Afferent Visual Diagnoses in mTBI
Although damage to the retinostriate pathway or optic nerves is rare in mTBI, a myriad of visual symptoms including blur, light sensitivity, difficulty reading, motion sensitivity, and eye fatigue have been reported to be associated with mTBI, and a variety of theories have been proposed to explain their genesis.
## Postconcussion Syndrome
In the absence of injury to the eyes or visual pathways, afferent symptoms may arise as part of postconcussion syndrome, a condition in which symptoms persist beyond the expected recovery period. As noted before, diagnosis of mTBI after the acute event16 remains dependent on historical data from the subject and witnesses at the scene. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition (DSM-IV) and International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision (ICD-10) criteria for diagnosing postconcussion syndrome require the diagnosis of mTBI as a first step, along with the persistence of 3 or more symptoms16 that can be grouped into cognitive, somatic, affective, and sleep-arousal domains.13 Visual symptoms may be included in the somatic category, although they are not specifically listed as part of the DSM-IV or ICD-10 criteria.16 Nevertheless, blur and diplopia are included in instruments for assessing the postconcussive state, such as the Rivermead Postconcussion Symptoms Questionnaire.17
The diagnosis of postconcussion syndrome is agnostic regarding the etiology or mechanism behind the symptoms. These can include cerebral effects on cognition; vestibular or ocular motor dysfunction; modulation effects of depression, anxiety, and other psychological factors; substance abuse; and functional disorders.15 However, there are other diagnostic terms in use that attribute a range of visual and nonvisual symptoms to impaired processing in mTBI without known mechanistic explanations.
## Posttrauma Vision Syndrome
This term refers to a set of symptoms and signs attributed to an imbalance of focal and ambient visual systems.18 The explanation is speculative, and there is little proof that the wide variety of visual and nonvisual symptoms of Posttrauma Vision Syndrome all originate in visual or ocular motor dysfunction. Indeed, given the potential for diffuse injury like mTBI to affect multiple systems, including vestibular, cognitive, psychological, and musculoskeletal function, it seems improbable that visual dysfunction alone is causing the many complaints of patients with mTBI.
## Midline Shift Syndrome
This diagnosis refers to a deviation of the subjective midline due to a mismatch between visual and proprioceptive information about the body’s center of mass.19 Such deviations resemble findings with egocentric hemineglect from right parietal lesions or past pointing with unilateral vestibular lesions,20 but it is not clear that similar anatomic problems underlie midline shift in mTBI and its reported presence has only a subjective basis. No anatomic explanation exists as to why midline shift should occur with mTBI.
## Vertical Heterophoria Syndrome
This diagnosis proposes that mTBI can cause a small vertical misalignment of the eyes from utricular or brainstem displacement.
## Adjunctive Diagnostic Tests for Afferent and Efferent Disorders
Standard assessments of convergence and accommodation have been described elsewhere. Measures of exotropia at near vs far and the near point of convergence are easily incorporated into a clinical examination, and recording quantitative assessments of both accommodation and convergence can aid in determining improvement over time. Autorefractors can be useful in diagnosing altered accommodative dynamics, and appropriate refractive correction should be provided to patients before CI is diagnosed. The Convergence Insufficiency Symptom Scale appears to be a reliable and efficient way of following symptoms in adults.
The Developmental Eye Movement Test times patients while they read numbers in vertical columns and then in horizontal arrays, with the ratio between the 2 taken as an indirect index of horizontal saccadic efficiency. This test has been recommended as a measure of saccadic function in mTBI and to assess its response to vision therapy. However, the results of this test do not actually correlate with direct measures of saccades, although they do correlate with measures of reading and visual processing speed. Of concern, the test’s poor between-session reproducibility in children has raised concerns about its utility as a diagnostic or monitoring tool.
The King-Devick test is a very similar test, also originally designed to be part of a reading evaluation, but now promoted as a tool for acute concussion assessment. Patients read numbers arranged in rows on 3 screens with successively decreasing spacing between the lines, and the reading time and error rate are recorded. It appears to be an indirect measure of saccadic speed and accuracy. Although there is debate about its accuracy for detecting concussion, there are few data on its use in diagnosing or monitoring post-concussive syndrome.
Neither the Developmental Eye Movement Test nor the King-Devick Test should be interpreted as indices of specific visual or ocular motor functions. Just as with reading, many functions contribute to performance on these tests, including saccades, fixation stability, convergence, accommodation, attention, language ability, and cognitive processing speed.
## Treatment
### Ocular Motor Training
Ocular motor training is a popular approach that involves a series of in-office visits for eye movement exercises intended to treat disorders of vergence, versions, and/or accommodation. The multicenter Convergence Insufficiency Treatment Trial, a randomized placebo-controlled study of children and young adults with primary CI, provided evidence of the efficacy and superiority of office-based treatments over home exercises and placebo treatment. Proof that accommodative or convergence therapy works in the mTBI variant is lacking, however, as recognized by a recent pilot study. There is 1 retrospective review and 1 prospective uncontrolled study of 19 patients that claim benefit. Improvement in vergence and accommodation was reported in a small series of 12 subjects with mTBI using a crossover design with placebo vs training on 3 exercises. However, methodological issues with this study led a Cochrane review to classify its evidence having very low certainty. Noted issues included the small sample size, drop out of 3 of the 12 subjects, flawed statistical analyses that relied on t tests that were not corrected for multiple comparisons, incomplete results from the 3 crossover arms that were performed, and the use of a crossover design for a situation that might not permit a washout period.
The utility and efficacy of training saccades and pursuit in mTBI are more uncertain. Claims of benefit are complicated by the fact that with one exception for pursuit, all studies have combined training of versions, vergence, and accommodation in their treatment program, making it difficult to isolate the effects of each intervention. Although some data suggest benefit in symptoms and saccadic measures with training, studies in more severe TBI showed that ocular motor deficits also improved with time in untreated subjects. Similarly, a recent prospective randomized pilot study of 14 hospitalized patients with TBI with oculomotor deficits showed improvement with either structured eye exercises or standard of care. We thus conclude that there are some grounds but insufficient proof for using convergence or accommodative treatments in mTBI, and the rationale or evidence for training version eye movements such as pursuit and saccades is lacking.
### Binasal Occlusion
Anecdotal case reports have claimed that placing opaque tape or filters on the nasal half of a patient’s spectacle lenses improves visually provoked dizziness, balance problems, sensitivity to busy environments, and movement-induced eye pain in mTBI. The rationale for this intervention is unclear. Some authors claim that the line of the tape provides a stable frame of reference in the visual field; others suggest that.
## Prisms
There is 1 report on yoked prisms (yoked means that the same prism in the same direction is applied to both eyes) for midline shift syndrome in 36 patients with a variety of disorders, including 10 who had experienced a concussion. Gait was analyzed for sway on a pressure-sensitive mat, with and without yoked prisms. Prisms induced a shift in balance, but there were no data to show that this would reduce falls in daily life. The study was not masked, and there was no comparison intervention. The data for the patients with mTBI were not reported separately.
The use of monocular vertical prism correction for VHS is not supported. Existing studies have circular logic: the diagnosis of the syndrome was based on subjective report of benefit from the prism during an assessment, and these subjects were then evaluated later with a questionnaire about benefit when wearing the prism. None reported a placebo intervention or a control group.
## Light Filters
Light sensitivity is also a common posttraumatic symptom, and it seems logical that wearing filtered lenses would improve this symptom. However, there is no firm evidence on whether specific types of filters are better and whether symptoms and function improve with filters. One study of 7 subjects with mTBI with photophobia found that some filters improved contrast sensitivity and reading times, with uncontrolled subjective reports of reduced light intolerance and headaches at home after the study. A study of 12 subjects with mTBI with photophobia compared a few minutes of use of red, blue, neutral density, or individualized filters, and a no lens condition, in random order. There was little effect of lenses on reading, and effects on light intolerance were not mentioned. Paradoxically, a retrospective review of 62 cases of mTBI found that improved light intolerance after a year was less likely in patients who were fitted lenses. Although patients who improved may have stopped wearing such lenses, the authors expressed concern that lens use might inhibit long-term adaptation that reduces light intolerance. There is evidence that FL-41 tinted lenses can improve photophobia in patients with migraine headache, but prospective data on the effect in patients with TBI-associated photosensitivity do not exist. A prospective study would be needed to address this concern, with controls to avoid a confounding effect from the anticipated benefit from concurrent headache treatment.
## Conclusions Regarding Treatment
All forms of vision therapy for mTBI must be regarded as having unproven benefit. For ocular motor training, there are reasonable grounds to believe that vergence or accommodative training may be of symptomatic benefit, but the rationale and evidence for training saccades and pursuit is poor. Similarly, there is no scientific rationale or evidence to support binasal occlusion, yoked prisms, or monocular vertical prisms. It is plausible that light filters may have some symptomatic benefit for light intolerance, but more evidence is required, particularly regarding the concern that filters may impede long-term recovery. Nonetheless, an open mind regarding potential benefit should be maintained until properly performed, scientifically rigorous studies are concluded and interpreted through the peer review process.
## Outcome Measures
Interpretation of the results of therapeutic interventions as noted above has been hampered by subjectivity in assessment of pre- and post-treatment patients, outcomes being determined based on improved performance on the tests used to define the apparent deficit and for which specific therapies aimed at test-taking tasks as desired, or other methodological factors. At a minimum, outcome measures should be designed such that they are administered by persons masked to the mTBI diagnosis and therapeutic interventions that have been performed. In addition, outcomes must be measured by validated (if only in theory) tools that are also designed to minimize learning effects that could indicate a false response to a rehabilitative strategy.
Most importantly, there are few randomized trials in which subjects with mTBI have been assigned to sham therapies for comparison. The lack of a control group in published studies is particularly concerning, given the fact that symptoms and signs of mTBI will improve over time in most individuals.
Nevertheless, mTBI symptoms do persist in a minority of patients. It has been reported that at least one-third of patients with mTBI with visual concerns may not present for evaluation until 1 or 2 years postinjury. Some particular subsets of concern include those with multiple mTBIs, who may be at increased risk for persistent visual symptoms, and those with dual sensory impairments (auditory/vestibular and visual), who also may not recover as well. Treatments may be more important for these mTBI subsets, but systematic studies have yet to be conducted.
## Recommendations
Prospective studies of rehabilitative strategies must be performed not only by experienced clinicians and researchers who are familiar with this problem but also by the broader neuro-
## Appendix Authors
| Name                   | Location                                                                                   | Contribution                                                                                                                                           |
|------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Prem S. Subramanian, MD, PhD | Departments of Ophthalmology, Neurology, and Neurosurgery, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO; Sue Anschutz-Rodgers University of Colorado Eye Center, Aurora, CO; Department of Surgery (Division of Ophthalmology), Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD | Drafting/revision of the manuscript for content, including medical writing for content; study concept or design; and analysis or interpretation of data |
| Jason J.S. Barton, MD  | Departments of Medicine (Neurology), Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada | Drafting/revision of the manuscript for content, including medical writing for content; study concept or design; and analysis or interpretation of data |
| Paul Ranalli, MD       | Departments of Medicine (Neurology), Otolaryngology, Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada | Drafting/revision of the manuscript for content, including medical writing for content; study concept or design; and analysis or interpretation of data |
| Craig Smith, MD        | Department of Medicine (Neurology), University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA | Drafting/revision of the manuscript for content, including medical writing for content and analysis or interpretation of data                            |
| Courtney E. Francis, MD | Department of Ophthalmology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA      | Drafting/revision of the manuscript for content, including medical writing for content and analysis or interpretation of data                            |
| Benjamin Frishberg, MD | Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego, CA, The Neurology Center, Carlsbad, CA | Drafting/revision of the manuscript for content, including medical writing for content; study concept or design; and analysis or interpretation of data |
## Study Funding
The authors report no targeted funding.
## Disclosure
The authors report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. Full disclosure form information provided by the authors is available with the full text of this article at Neurology.org/cp.
## Publication History
Received by **Neurology: Clinical Practice** March 9, 2022. Accepted in final form July 20, 2022. Submitted and externally peer reviewed. The handling editor was Associate Editor Jack W. Tsao, MD, DPhil, FAAN.