## Information Statement
Use of Artificial Intelligence in the Diagnosis of Diabetic Retinopathy and Other Conditions
### Introduction
Innovative technologies are rapidly being developed including some for remote detection and diagnosis of diabetic retinopathy. These technologies based on machine learning, often called artificial intelligence, can allow autonomous remote diagnosis of diabetic retinopathy at the point of care. These could improve access and referral, enhance timely management of the condition, and reduce health care visits and costs.
### Background
The purpose of an effective screening program for diabetic retinopathy is to determine who needs to be referred to an ophthalmologist for close follow-up and possible treatment and who may simply be screened annually. Studies have shown that screening programs using digital retinal images taken with or without dilation may enable early detection of diabetic retinopathy along with a timely, appropriate referral.¹-³ These have used “store and forward” technology with reading center and/or physician interpretations. Studies have found a positive association between participating in a photographic screening program and subsequent adherence to receiving recommended comprehensive dilated eye examinations by a clinician.⁴,⁵ Given the known gap in accessibility of direct ophthalmologic screening, retinal imaging screening programs may help increase the chances that at-risk individuals will be promptly referred for more detailed evaluation and management. The recent expansion with a validated and FDA-approved autonomous point of care system with refer/no refer outputs has joined the remote imaging systems in operation today.⁶
### Recommendations
The Academy recognizes the potential of autonomous diagnostic tests in increasing access to health care services, enhancing patient involvement in their health care decision making, improving efficiency, and reducing health care costs. The Academy recommends that ophthalmologists and policy makers evaluate these technologies as they would any other diagnostic tests, ensuring they are validated and have appropriate regulatory approval before deployment and are updated as needed. As with any other device or technology selected for use in patient care, the ophthalmologist could bear some risk of medicolegal liability of any harm to the patient, for a missed diagnosis, or a breach of PHI.
The American Academy of Ophthalmology is the largest national membership association of ophthalmologists—medical and osteopathic doctors who provide comprehensive eye care, including medical, surgical and optical care. More than 90 percent of practicing U.S. ophthalmologists are Academy members, and the Academy has more than 7,000 international members.
Finalized June 2020
Approved by the Telemedicine Task Force, Task force on Artificial Intelligence, Health Policy Committee, Medical Information and Technology Committee
Approved by the Quality of Care Secretary