## Journal Pre-proof
### Guidelines for the Diagnosis, Management, and Study of Autoimmune Retinopathy from the American Academy of Ophthalmology's Task Force
**Authors:**
Bobeck S. Modjtahedi, MD, Alan G. Palestine, MD, Lee M. Jampol, MD, David Sarraf, MD, H. Nida Sen, MD, Lucia Sobrin, MD, MPH, John J. Chen, MD, PhD, Paul Yang, Grazyna Adamus, PhD, Donald S. Fong, MD, MPH, Cynthia X. Qian, MD, Flora Lum, MD
**PII:** S2468-6530(25)00153-8
**DOI:** [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oret.2025.03.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oret.2025.03.024)
**Reference:** ORET 1965
**To appear in:** *Ophthalmology Retina*
**Received Date:** 18 March 2025
**Revised Date:** 24 March 2025
**Accepted Date:** 25 March 2025
Please cite this article as: Modjtahedi B.S., Palestine A.G., Jampol L.M., Sarraf D., Sen H.N., Sobrin L., Chen J.J., Yang P., Adamus G., Fong D.S., Qian C.X. & Lum F., Guidelines for the Diagnosis, Management, and Study of Autoimmune Retinopathy from the American Academy of Ophthalmology's Task Force, *Ophthalmology Retina* (2025), doi: [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oret.2025.03.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oret.2025.03.024).
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2025 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of American Academy of Ophthalmology
## Guidelines for the Diagnosis, Management, and Study of Autoimmune Retinopathy
from the American Academy of Ophthalmology's Task Force
Running head: AAO Task Force Recommendations for AIR
Bobeck S. Modjtahedi MD, Alan G. Palestine MD, Lee M. Jampol MD, David Sarraf MD, H. Nida Sen MD, Lucia Sobrin, MD, MPH, John J. Chen MD, PhD, Paul Yang, Grazyna Adamus PhD, Donald S. Fong MD, MPH, Cynthia X. Qian MD, Flora Lum, MD
1. Department of Research and Evaluation, Southern California Permanente Medical Group, Pasadena.
2. Department of Clinical Science, Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine, Pasadena, California.
3. Eye Monitoring Center, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, Baldwin Park.
4. Department of Ophthalmology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado.
5. Department of Ophthalmology Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago Illinois.
6. Retinal Disorders and Ophthalmic Genetics Division, Stein Eye Institute, University of California of Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States.
7. George Washington University.
8. Department of Ophthalmology, Mass Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School.
9. Department of Ophthalmology and Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
10. Paul H. Casey Ophthalmic Genetics Division, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR.
11. Ocular Immunology Laboratory, Casey Eye Institute, School of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR.
12. Department of Ophthalmology, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
13. American Academy of Ophthalmology, San Francisco, CA.
### Corresponding Author
Bobeck S. Modjtahedi, MD
Department of Research and Evaluation
Southern California Permanente Medical Group
100 S Los Robles Ave #2
Pasadena, CA 91101
There are no funding sources for this manuscript. No conflicting relationships exist for any author. All authors have submitted ICMJE COI form which outlines all other financial disclosures.
## Abstract
**Purpose:** The American Academy of Ophthalmology created a task force to advance the understanding of autoimmune retinopathy (AIR) and provide guidelines on the diagnosis and management of this complex disorder.
**Design:** A search on PubMed and Google Scholar of English-language studies was conducted without date restrictions. The Task Force reviewed the current literature and formulated an expert consensus on the management of AIR as well as recommendations for future efforts to improve our understanding of this condition.
**Results:** Key clinical and imaging features are discussed, and a new diagnostic framework is proposed based on likelihood of AIR (probable AIR, possible AIR, and unlikely AIR) to provide a more standardized approach for categorizing disease. Patients who possess all the following features can be categorized as having probable AIR:
1. signs of disease progression based on subjective symptoms and objective testing within six months,
2. examination with less than 1+ anterior chamber or vitreous cell/haze,
3. optical coherence tomography (OCT) with outer retinal disruption and loss of the external limiting membrane/outer retinal bands/ellipsoid zone often relatively sparing the fovea,
4. characteristic fundus autofluorescence (FAF) abnormalities,
5. full field ERG with reduction of both rod and cone responses, and
6. positive anti-retinal antibodies.
Those with some but not all of these features, or with otherwise atypical presentations, can be classified as possible AIR.
Features that would make AIR unlikely and should elicit strong suspicion for alternative diagnoses are:
1. slowly progressive symptoms or changes on testing taking place over years,
2. retinal examination with bone spicules, retinal vascular sheathing, or retinal hemorrhages,
3. examination with more than 1+
## Conclusions
These criteria will allow for better classification of patients reported in the literature and improve communication between clinicians. Further study is necessary to optimize the approach for managing AIR and will require collaborative multi-center efforts.
## American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) Task Force on Autoimmune Retinopathy (AIR)
The American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) convened a task force of experts on autoimmune retinopathy (AIR) to develop a white paper to provide a framework to define AIR, recommend initial practice management guidelines, identify the current limitations in our understanding, and recommend approaches for improving diagnostic accuracy and therapeutic interventions. AIR is a rare and poorly understood condition characterized by retinal degeneration believed to be mediated by antiretinal antibodies. AIR can be non-paraneoplastic (npAIR) or paraneoplastic.
There are two forms of paraneoplastic AIR:
- Cancer associated retinopathy (CAR)
- Melanoma associated retinopathy (MAR)
This report will focus principally on npAIR given the unique challenges posed by this disease.
There have been various efforts to characterize AIR since the 1970s based on patient demographics, symptoms, imaging features, and anti-retinal antibody testing; however, the heterogeneous nature of AIR has created significant limitations in our understanding of how to diagnose and manage this condition, which necessitates improved practical guidance for clinicians and researchers. As a result, this Task Force developed an expert consensus for this white paper after having conducted an English-language literature review on studies indexed in PubMed and Google Scholar without date restrictions through September 2024 around search terms “autoimmune retinopathy,” “cancer associated retinopathy,” and “melanoma associated retinopathy.” No patient data was analyzed for this report. Institutional review board approval and informed consent were not required.
## The Task Force Aims
The Task Force aims to provide the foundations for future Academy efforts to improve the diagnosis and treatment of AIR by:
1. Informing clinicians on the diagnostic and management approach to patients with suspected AIR, with an emphasis on the limitations in current approaches and testing.
2. Supporting the development of multi-center registries and clinical trials to improve our understanding of the epidemiology, pathophysiology, risk factors, clinical features, and possible treatments of this condition.
3. Developing collaborations between clinicians and researchers to create programs to enhance the exchange of information.
## Diagnosis
AIR is a challenging condition to diagnose, especially early in the disease, given frequently vague symptoms, overlap with other conditions, and subtle examination and imaging findings. The various clinical features of paraneoplastic and npAIR can overlap with those of inherited retinal diseases, toxic retinopathies, and inflammatory retinal conditions. Owing to the historical lack of standardized diagnostic criteria, there have been a wide spectrum of clinical and imaging features described in patients with AIR.
Many prior reports have included equivocal or even debatable cases of AIR, which has then compounded the already existing confusion around how to identify and treat this condition. There is no single confirmatory test or clinical feature for AIR, and previously described characteristics are non-specific when considered in isolation.
## Clinical symptoms and findings of examination and multimodal ocular imaging
Patients with AIR may describe painless photopsias, nyctalopia, photoaversion, dyschromatopsia, and vision loss often starting peripherally or with a paracentral scotoma.¹² Approximately two thirds of patients with AIR are women.¹⁴⁵ AIR typically afflicts middle aged or older individuals often with a family or personal history of autoimmune disease.¹²⁴⁶ npAIR tends to affect younger patients than CAR. Visual symptoms and retinal findings can predate the diagnosis of cancer in CAR, although most patients with MAR already have an established diagnosis of metastatic melanoma.²⁷
Symptoms of AIR typically are progressive and evolve over the course of weeks to months, although some patients may rarely have symptoms for years prior to diagnosis.¹²⁸ Inherited retinal disease (IRD) patients typically present when young, but they can also present for evaluation in adulthood after they reach a threshold level of visual impairment; however, careful questioning may reveal the presence of subtle visual symptoms years before presentation including in childhood (e.g., an aversion to playing outside at night, difficulty with ball sports, inability to see stars at night) which is not typical in patients with AIR who present as adults with a more acute onset of vision loss.
## Late Adult-Onset Cases of Inherited Retinal Dystrophies
Over several months. Importantly, late adult-onset cases of inherited retinal dystrophies that can mimic AIR have been described, including those due to hypomorphic variants in **HGSNAT** associated rod-cone dystrophy as well as specific variants in **DRAM2** or **RP1** that can cause late-onset cone or cone-rod dystrophy. Classic cases of **C1QTNF5**-associated late-onset retinal dystrophy (LORD) may present late in the 5–6th decade of life, but its key feature of drusenoid deposits is inconsistent with the typical phenotypic range of AIR. While certain IRDs may mimic the *initial* presentation of AIR as discussed above, it is important to highlight that the rate of retinal degeneration should be used to help distinguish between IRD and AIR. Thus, childhood early-onset presentation is **not specific to IRD** and adult late-onset presentation is **not specific to AIR.** The lack of early-onset visual symptoms in childhood cannot be used to dependably rule out genetic etiology which should be considered especially in those with slowly progressive bilateral symmetric retinopathy.
## Asymmetry and Symptoms in AIR and IRD
AIR is typically bilateral, but marked asymmetry can be encountered especially early in the disease. Symptom onset and clinical course of IRD tends to be more indolent than AIR, with patients describing gradual changes over the course of years. A family history of similar visual symptoms such as nyctalopia or peripheral field loss (even without a specific diagnosis) should increase the suspicion for IRD although the absence of similarly affected family members would not rule out a genetic etiology.
## Presence of Intraocular Inflammation
The presence of intraocular inflammation especially if moderate or severe, defined as more than 1+ anterior chamber or vitreous cell/haze, should prompt strong consideration.
## Content
for uveitic diagnoses. Trace to 1+ anterior vitreous cell are commonly observed in IRD and can also be seen in AIR, while vitreous haze is especially rare for both conditions.
Central visual acuity can be preserved until late in the disease, however loss over many months is also possible. The frequently vague nature of patient’s subjective symptoms and the subtle findings on examination and imaging can result in a delay in AIR diagnosis. Patients with AIR will typically exhibit minimal findings on retinal examination early in the disease whereas more advanced cases may show retinal pigmentary changes, attenuated blood vessels, and disc pallor, which can be indistinguishable from the findings encountered with inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs); however, bone spicule formation is very atypical for AIR. Retinal damage is typically irreversible which is why early diagnosis and management is important.
Multimodal retinal imaging and testing is especially valuable for early diagnosis. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) often shows ellipsoid layer disruption, but changes may not be apparent early in the disease when retinal dysfunction is present without much cell death. Eventually attenuation, disorganization and ultimately loss of the outer nuclear and ellipsoid layer usually occur.
#### FIGURE 1
Figure 1 demonstrates characteristic outer retinal changes in early (Figure 1a) and later stage AIR (Figure 1b). Central preservation of a foveal island of the ellipsoid band can be a late finding similar to that encountered in retinitis pigmentosa. This loss of parafoveal outer retinal bands with a tapered transition zone was the most common OCT finding of patients with suspected AIR described by Xu and colleagues and was identified in at least one eye of 92% patients they described. A tapered parafoveal transition zone is also commonly encountered in IRDs and differs.
## Intraretinal Degenerative Cystic Changes
Intraretinal degenerative cystic changes can be present typically in the middle retinal layer (i.e. inner nuclear layer) and can range from small slit-like cysts to larger cystoid cavities, frequently accompanied with outer retinal atrophy similar to the findings of retinitis pigmentosa. Xu and colleagues found that 24% of eyes with suspected AIR were complicated by cystoid macular edema at some point during the observed clinical course. Inner retinal thinning with ganglion cell layer loss can also complicate AIR, although isolated nerve fiber layer atrophy is very atypical early in the disease unless the optic nerve is the primary target of an autoimmune process such as in collapsin response-mediator protein 5 (CRMP5) autoimmunity.
OCT scans in the mid periphery may demonstrate early disruption or loss of the outer retinal layers and can be helpful in detecting early changes before there is progression into the central macula. Pericentral retinopathy from hydroxychloroquine toxicity with damage near the arcades has been described primarily in Asian groups and is an important differential diagnosis for AIR. Forms of AIR with predominantly inner retinal involvement are less well characterized and require further study to understand the evolution of retinal changes across different layers as the disease progresses.
## Fluorescein Angiogram (FA) and Retinal Vascular Leakage
Fluorescein angiogram (FA) will typically show staining in areas of associated RPE disruption and retinal vascular leakage can be present, which can be the result of degenerative retinal changes and tissue loss leading to vascular incompetence. These findings may be difficult to distinguish from mild inflammatory changes. Retinal vascular leakage or staining (e.g. fern-like leakage) can complicate AIR and these cases must be differentiated from a primary retinal vasculitis or intermediate uveitis.
Findings such as retinal vascular sheathing, diffuse vascular leakage, intraocular inflammation, and large areas of nonperfusion favor the vasculitis/inflammatory diagnoses and not AIR.
Patients suspected of having AIR should receive evaluation for occult posterior uveitis, with fluorescein and/or indocyanine green angiography since “burned out” or late retinal vasculitis can resemble AIR. Diffuse and selective outer retinal/ellipsoid loss favors a diagnosis of AIR over most ocular inflammatory diseases which either tend to cause damage to more retinal layers or be localized to areas of retinitis/choroiditis.
Infectious and noninfectious inflammatory retinopathies with seemingly isolated outer retinal disruption (i.e. syphilis, atypical forms of white dot syndromes, or birdshot chorioretinopathy) should also be considered in the differential diagnosis of AIR and elicit additional evaluation including laboratory testing when appropriate.
## Ultrawide Field Fundus Autofluorescence (FAF)
Ultrawide field fundus autofluorescence (FAF) is helpful in capturing areas of retinal compromise, especially beyond the macula (Figure 2 and Figure 3). A parafoveal ring or speckling of hyperautofluorescence has been described in npAIR and CAR but is also a classic finding of IRDs (i.e., Robson-Holder ring).
The appearance of these rings can vary and can progress to hypo-autofluorescence. Xu and colleagues observed that a...
## Electrophysiologic and visual field testing
Electrophysiologic testing is critical to the diagnosis of AIR because it provides an objective means to identify retinal dysfunction. Changes in the electroretinogram (ERG) are non-specific in AIR—any component of the ERG waveform can be impacted and there is no uniquely diagnostic pattern.¹ Depressions in ERG out of proportion to clinical examination and imaging should raise concerns for early AIR.² Since AIR causes a diffuse retinal degeneration, it would be atypical to have an abnormal multifocal ERG with a normal full field ERG in this condition. Such a pattern would be characteristic of an isolated maculopathy, which is not a common phenotype of AIR. Although anti-enolase AIR has been reported to preferentially affect cones on ERG testing,⁸ rod
## Electrogenic Retinal Dysfunction in AIR
Dysfunction can also be present. An electronegative ERG wherein the b-wave is selectively reduced such that the waveform fails to return to baseline has been classically described in MAR, although other patterns of ERG loss can be seen in MAR while electronegative ERGs have been described in several other retinal conditions including those that may share some phenotypic overlap with MAR.
Although several antiretinal antibodies have been described in MAR, antibodies to the Transient Receptor Potential Melastatin 1 (TRPM1) protein have generated particular interest because TRPM1 is expressed by ON bipolar cells whose targeting can give rise to an electronegative ERG in patients with MAR.
Other diseases in the differential diagnosis for AIR, such as IRD, can have similar ERG findings, and other factors can also reduce the ERG including age, refractive status, ocular inflammatory diseases, certain medications, systemic conditions such as diabetes, and prior retinal treatments including lasers.
Due to the typically progressive nature of AIR, serial ERG testing is essential in patients with equivocal initial findings or indolent presentations. Demonstrating significant decline in ERG responses over a period of less than six months would be more indicative of AIR than IRDs.
## Constriction of Visual Field in AIR
Constriction of the peripheral visual field and/or central/paracentral scotomas on visual field testing are usually encountered in AIR, often with some degree of asymmetry. Scotomas contiguous with the physiologic blind spot were encountered in a majority of Xu and colleagues’ series of patients.
While Goldmann Visual Fields (GVF) may be preferred given the capacity to provide more extensive evaluation of the peripheral vision, automated fields are more practical and widely available and do not require a
## Laboratory Testing
Understanding when to test for anti-retinal antibodies and how to interpret the results represents a frequent diagnostic dilemma. Sen and colleagues surveyed members of the American Uveitis Society and found that many did not know or overestimated the specificity of antiretinal antibodies. Antiretinal antibodies can be detected in patients with other ocular diseases (including those without a presumed immunologic basis), systemic disease without ocular manifestation, and healthy individuals. Given this lack of specificity for AIR, it is important to consider anti-retinal antibodies as an adjunct test that needs to be interpreted in the appropriate clinical context rather than confirmatory test for AIR.
The concept that antibodies are responsible for retinal damage in AIR first emerged in cases of CAR and was subsequently extended to npAIR given the phenotypic similarities between these conditions and the detection of antibodies in npAIR patients. Although tumors are known to contain antigens that can elicit antibodies that cross-react with
## Retinal Tissues
The trigger for antibody production in npAIR remains unclear and has been theorized to originate from regressed tumors or molecular mimicry from infections. Anti-retinal antibodies are not necessarily pathogenic and may represent an epiphenomenon in which they develop as the result of retinal damage with resultant exposure of retinal antigens inducing antibody production.
It has also been suggested that in some cases, antiretinal antibodies may represent a secondary process which worsens a primary pathologic process damaging the retina. Particular caution should be employed when interpreting anti-retinal antibody tests in patients who have systemic autoimmune conditions which can produce abnormal serum antibodies that could be detected with anti-retinal antibody panels but may be unrelated to any ophthalmic issue.
Patients will frequently possess multiple anti-retinal antibodies which raises questions about which antibodies are truly causing retinal damage, which are produced by retinal damage from other etiologies (such as IRDs) or epiphenomenon, and which are incidental to the patient’s retinal condition.
It has been suggested that the likelihood of AIR increases with increasing number of antibodies detected. Bae and colleagues correlated a higher number of antibodies with photoreceptor disruption and severe ERG dysfunction in patients with presumed AIR, with a statistically nonsignificant trend towards worse vision. Nonetheless, a single more specific antibody (e.g., recoverin for the diagnosis of CAR) may carry more diagnostic weight than several less well-established anti-retinal antibodies in the appropriate clinical context.
Anti-retinal antibody testing can be performed with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), Western blot, line blot, or immunohistochemistry (IHC), with Western blot or ELISA preferred methods for more specific identification.
## Document Content
Line blot often combined with IHC being the most frequently used in clinical practice.¹,¹⁵
The lack of a standardized approach remains a major limitation to antiretinal antibody testing.¹,¹³,¹⁵ Western blot identifies antibodies based on molecular weight, which renders the findings non-specific for a particular antibody (e.g., recoverin, enolase) as different proteins may have the same size.¹,¹³ Conversely, ELISA testing targets specific pre-defined retinal antigens; however, testing is not sensitive because it is limited in scope to only those antigens which precludes the detection of other antiretinal antibodies.¹ Western blot uses denatured proteins while line blot uses native proteins that are printed on a membrane.³⁰ Line blot can theoretically provide more specificity than Western blot and ELISA, but can still have false positives. IHC involves fixing a patient’s serum to frozen retinal tissue (either donor human or animal) to identify antibody-retinal binding under microscopy¹,² and is less sensitive than Western or line blot.³⁰ Faez and colleagues found a 60% concordance between two labs [Oregon Health and Sciences University (OHSU) and University of California, Davis] when comparing the detection of any antiretinal antibody and 36% when comparing antibody-specific concordance.³¹ Chen and colleagues found an overall concordance of 57% between two labs (OHSU and Mayo Clinic Neuroimmunology Research Laboratory).³² Chen et al.’s analysis of 14 patients without AIR found that 93% (13/14) had positive antiretinal antibodies on Western blot with confirmatory positive IHC in 86% (12/14).³² There was a median of five positive antiretinal antibodies (range 0-8). Although none of the subjects were found to have anti-recoverin antibodies, 9 (64%) did have α-enolase antibodies.³²
The reported presence and type of antiretinal antibodies in prior studies of healthy controls, patients with non-AIR retinal disease, and AIR varies considerably in the
## Genetic Testing in Patients Suspected of Having AIR
Genetic testing in patients suspected of having AIR, especially those with atypical features, was completed in one small study: 2/6 patients had confirmed genetic disease, 2/6 had variances of unknown significance in genes responsible for IRDs, and 2/6 exhibited no abnormalities on genetic testing. While certain positive results can effectively rule out AIR, genetic testing ultimately has a low negative predictive value since these panels have an estimated 60% sensitivity. As such, a negative test does not rule out inherited etiology. Nonetheless, given the phenotypic overlap between AIR and IRD, genetic testing should part of the standard evaluation in the majority of suspected cases of AIR, with consideration for genetic consultation for detected anomalies.
Prior to embarking on genetic evaluation, it is important to educate patients on the implications of positive results for family members including the possible need for additional testing or pre-conception counseling. In complex cases such as in patients who are AIR suspects, IRD genetic test results should be interpreted cautiously in consultation with an ophthalmic geneticist and/or genetic counselor.
Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants discovered in genes that are known to be disease-causing and fit the patient's phenotype can be used to rule out AIR; however, some genes can cause both autosomal recessive or dominant disease depending on the variant, in which case the monoallelic (heterozygous) versus biallelic nature (compound heterozygous, homozygous) of the variants must be properly considered in context of the phenotype and pedigree in order to determine.
## Systemic evaluation for cancer/autoimmune disease
Patients with AIR require a systemic cancer evaluation to look for potential causative malignancy, which is essential in the differentiation of npAIR from CAR/MAR. Although small-cell lung cancer is the most encountered malignancy in CAR, a wide range of malignancies have been associated with this diagnosis. Ophthalmologists should work with internists and primary care physicians, possibly in consultation with oncologists, to complete a thorough evaluation for primary cancers including body imaging, dermatologic evaluation, and appropriate cancer screening (e.g., mammography, colonoscopy, magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, computed tomography of the
## Diagnostic Approach
The key disorders in the differential diagnosis of AIR include late-onset IRD, drug toxicity (such as pentosan, hydroxychloroquine or anti-cancer agents), vitamin A deficiency, and retinal inflammatory conditions including syphilis, birdshot chorioretinopathy, and the white-dot syndromes.¹²
Fox and colleagues¹⁵ proposed five essential diagnostic features for npAIR:
1. Visual function abnormality without other apparent cause
2. Abnormalities on ERG (+/- visual field defects)
3. Serum antiretinal antibodies
4. Lack of other lesions that could explain the vision loss (including retinal lesions
## consistent with IRD)
5. No "overt" intraocular inflammation (defined as less than 1+ intraocular cell or haze)
These criteria provide an excellent framework to consider when evaluating patients with suspected AIR; however, implementation can be challenging because there remains notable clinical overlap between retinal conditions.
Initial assessment of patients suspected to have AIR should include clinical examination, OCT, widefield FA, widefield FAF, visual field testing, and full field ERG. Antiretinal antibodies should be reserved as the final test when there is a sufficient clinical concern, especially with rapid degeneration, to justify further evaluation with a high pretest probability for AIR. This should be done to avoid false positives that would necessitate more extensive, and possibly unnecessary evaluation such as full body imaging. Follow up can be done initially every 3 to 6 months, with clinical exam, multimodal retinal imaging, and visual diagnostics to assess for signs of progression. Although antibody titers can decrease following therapy, serial testing of antibody titers is not done routinely given challenges in testing reproducibility and the lack of accepted threshold for therapeutic response. Future investigations should aim to identify whether there are serum markers that can be used to determine treatment response.
### Treatment
There is insufficient data to provide treatment guidelines for AIR as prior reports have been mostly limited to case reports or small cases series without comparison groups.
## Treatment and Progression of Autoimmune Retinopathy (AIR)
While there are reports of improvement in visual symptoms, the primary goal of treatment is the prevention of progression.¹⁻³ Many prior investigations employed multiple treatments concurrently and therefore the identification of a specific therapeutic effect can be challenging.² It can take up to a year or longer before the rate of degeneration is slowed or disease stabilization is observed for those undergoing systemic immunomodulatory therapy.³ ³⁶ The therapeutic effect of different interventions is difficult to quantify in many studies because the long-term natural history of AIR is poorly understood and appears to be heterogeneous. Some patients, especially those with more end-stage disease, may not show significant progression in the absence of treatment which makes the decision to initiate therapy challenging. Treatment may have greatest potential for benefit early in the disease;¹ ² however, this is often the period when making a diagnosis can be most challenging.
### Overview of Treatment Options
Intraocular and systemic corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulin, plasmapheresis, and systemic immunosuppression with antimetabolites, T-cell inhibitors, and targeted B-cell therapy have all been employed.¹⁻³ ¹³ ¹⁵ ³⁶ Fox and colleagues found expert consensus that local or systemic steroids, conventional immunosuppression, biologics, and intravenous immunoglobulin were appropriate treatment options; however, consensus was not reached on the use of plasmapheresis.¹⁵ Rituximab is an attractive treatment option as it directly reduces antibody production, thus targeting the presumed cause of retinal damage.³⁷ The addition to bortezomib to rituximab was suggested to provide benefit on electrophysiologic testing in one small series.³⁸ Intraocular steroids can help control macular edema, and may also have a role in managing AIR even in the absence of edema.
```markdown
with improvement in ellipsoid zone and RPE architecture being previously described.
Modulating the immune system has been the primary therapeutic target for AIR. Caspase inhibitors and calcium channel blockers have been suggested as possible therapeutics options in AIR based on their role in antibody mediated apoptosis and experimental models of anti-recoverin antibody toxicity.
Kapoor and colleagues’ meta-analysis based on 12 studies (110 patients, 208 treated eye) explored outcomes of patients treated for AIR based on visual acuity, visual field, cystoid macular edema, ERG, central retinal thickness, and ellipsoid zone loss. Three treatment groups were considered (local therapy, systemic therapy, and biologic agents). The authors were unable to separate treatment effect within medication class due to small study sizes. Systemic therapy was found to significantly slow vision loss, visual field loss, and cystoid macular edema with biologic agents achieving these end-points as well as a slowing of central retinal thickness loss. Local therapy slowed progression of visual acuity loss, visual field loss, cystoid macular edema, central retinal thickness loss, and ellipsoid zone loss.
Interpreting the results of prior studies is complicated by heterogeneity between the studies including differences in the definition of AIR, inclusion of different types of AIR (npAIR, CAR, or MAR), different measured outcomes, and variable follow-up times, as well as a bias towards publishing positive results, which all further underscore the need for prospective randomized clinical trials.
## The Academy’s Task Force Recommendations for Characterizing AIR:
The Task Force recommends classifying patients based on the likelihood of AIR: probable AIR, possible AIR, and unlikely AIR (Table 1). It is recommended that future
```
## Probable AIR Criteria
Probable AIR is defined by possession of **all** the following features:
- Signs of disease progression based on subjective symptoms and objective testing within six months.
- Examination with less than 1+ anterior chamber or vitreous cell/haze.
- OCT with outer retinal disruption and loss of the external limiting membrane/outer retinal bands/ellipsoid zone often with relatively sparing the fovea.
- Abnormal FAF in the patterns described above.
- Full field ERG with reduction of both rod and cone responses.
- Positive anti-retinal antibodies.
The purpose of these criteria is to identify patients where there is high certainty of the diagnosis. Failure to possess all these features does not rule out the possibility of AIR, especially because not all features may be present in some patients early in their disease.
Patients who possess some, but not all these features can be considered as having possible AIR and close observation may be warranted to determine if there is any progression of features of retinal degeneration on functional testing or structural imaging that would be more characteristic of probable AIR. This diagnostic framework can be applied to patients with a contributing underlying extraocular malignancy to define CAR.
## Features in Patients Unlikely to Have AIR
Features that are present in patients who are unlikely to have AIR, and should elicit strong consideration of alternative diagnoses, include:
- Slowly progressive symptoms or changes on testing taking place over years.
- Retinal examination with bone spicules, retinal vascular sheathing, or retinal hemorrhages.
- Examination with more than 1+ anterior chamber or vitreous cell/haze.
- OCT changes predominantly at the level of the RPE or areas of focal/sharply delineated outer retinal/RPE atrophy.
- Fluorescein angiography with diffuse retinal vasculitis or large areas of non-perfusion.
- A normal full-field ERG (even with an abnormal mfERG).
- Absence of anti-retinal antibodies. In those with initially negative anti-retinal antibody testing, repeat testing can be considered after 6 months when patients possess the other features of AIR.
## Discussion
The Academy seeks to improve the understanding of and better guide the evaluation and management of AIR, identify areas that require further investigation, and propose a framework for future studies (Table 2). The significant advancement in retinal imaging and expansion of antiretinal antibody testing since the earliest descriptions of AIR heightens the need for more robust contemporary data. Efforts should be made to improve our understanding of the long-term natural history and risk factors for AIR.
## Document Content
better identify the prognostic features on imaging and laboratory testing and the biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment response. The Task Force recommends utilizing the newly proposed classification system for AIR in future investigations. This will make findings easier to characterize by separating patients with more definitive signs of AIR from those with equivocal findings. Cases of probable AIR should be used as the starting point for future investigations to ensure a higher level of confidence in the appropriateness of patients selected for studies.
There remain several important limitations to our understanding of AIR that require additional study. Further investigations are needed to understand the autoimmune triggers for npAIR as well as the pathophysiologic mechanism for retinal damage. There is also a need for a better epidemiological understanding of AIR. The consistent application of diagnostic criteria and the development of diagnostic codes for AIR would facilitate improved analyses of epidemiological trends including enhancing our understanding of the real-world incidence and prevalence of this condition. Additionally, further exploration is necessary to better define the phenotypic and prognostic spectrum of AIR based on factors such as anti-retinal antibody type and baseline clinical features.
There are significant gaps in our knowledge about anti-retinal antibodies that need to be addressed including assessing the relative value of the number and types of antibodies detected as it pertains to diagnosis, prognosis, indications for treatment (including treatment type), and therapeutic response. Importantly, further study is needed into how to best detect antiretinal antibodies to address prior reports of inconsistency between
## Standardization of Anti-Retinal Antibody Testing
There is a need to ensure the standardization of anti-retinal antibody assays as well as to better define the sensitivity and specificity of AIR line blot, WB, and IHC, and whether there is a benefit in using multiple testing methods during patient evaluation. More information is needed on the ideal type of tissue for IHC fixation and whether animal tissue can be substituted for human retina.
## AIR Diagnostic Scheme and Future Directions
Many publications include AIR patients whose diagnosis is debatable, which creates unreliability around the presented findings. The diagnostic classification scheme proposed herein can be applied to multi-center registry studies which could perform pooled and blinded analyses of cases to examine natural history, create greater diagnostic standardization, and improve our understanding of AIR's pathogenesis. Future investigations should focus on features of patients who progress from possible to probable AIR to improve the ability to predict disease progression. This can be done prospectively or with retrospective analyses of patients to identify findings earlier in the disease course that could foretell future progression to more definite AIR. This would allow for the evolution to a more robust diagnostic framework and revised criteria in the future.
## Therapeutic Approaches for AIR
A key priority is identifying the most efficacious therapeutic approach in patients with AIR. Further investigations are necessary to define what metrics to follow in patients receiving treatment, how to best define treatment success, and what patients may most benefit from intervention. Although the consistency of the existing literature is limited, targeting antibody production via B cell therapy makes mechanistic sense and has been
## Content
employed in diseases with similar proposed pathophysiology as AIR. As such, future investigations may begin with randomized controlled multicentered studies of B-cell targeted therapies such as rituximab.
Educational efforts are needed to increase awareness of this condition and to emphasize the appropriate clinical approach. One critical advancement will be to create specific international classification of disease codes for AIR and CAR to facilitate clinical research, insurance coverage, medical recognition, and education of this insidious and blinding disorder. Large-scale multi-center approaches are necessary to sufficiently power future investigations. The Academy will seek to facilitate multicenter collaborations between basic science and clinical researchers as well as front-line clinicians. The Academy supports efforts to bring resources to the study of AIR by highlighting its role as an important cause of vision loss that requires greater collaborative study.