## Intravitreal Injection Policy Statement
### Policy
Patients undergoing intravitreal injections require the care and judgment of an ophthalmologist experienced in diagnosing and treating retinal diseases as well as potential complications that may necessitate surgical intervention. The Academy strongly supports the position that all intravitreal injections should be performed only by ophthalmologists, who are licensed doctors of medicine or osteopathy.
### Background
Intravitreal injections of air were first used in 1911 for the purpose of repairing retinal detachments. Since that time, intravitreal injections have been used to treat a variety of conditions, including endophthalmitis, intraocular lymphoma, cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis, submacular hemorrhage, vitreous hemorrhage, retinal vascular occlusive disease, diabetic retinopathy, diabetic macular edema, myopic choroidal neovascularization, neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD), and geographic atrophy secondary to AMD. The primary benefit of intravitreal injection is the targeting of the therapeutic agent in the eye while minimizing systemic absorption. In 1998, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of the first agent for intravitreal injections, fomivirsen sodium (Vitravene, Isis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA), an antiviral used in the treatment of CMV retinitis.
### Anti-VEGF Agents
The frequency of intravitreal injections significantly increased with the introduction of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) medications. In the early 2000s, the use of intravitreal injections accelerated, fueled by clinical trials and technology assessments that demonstrated the safety and effectiveness of VEGF inhibitors for the treatment of neovascular AMD. Anti-VEGF agents have become the first-line of therapy for treating and stabilizing most cases of neovascular AMD.
Anti-VEGF agents are used for treatment of many other retinal diseases such as diabetic retinopathy, diabetic macular edema, and retinal vein occlusion. Multiple well-designed studies have demonstrated that intravitreal anti-VEGF agents provide a more effective treatment for center-involved diabetic macular edema than monotherapy with laser surgery. Therefore, anti-VEGF agents are the preferred initial treatment choice for patients with center-involved diabetic macular edema in whom visual acuity is affected.
### Recommendations for Patient Care
It is important to master the techniques of effective injections for patient safety, and guidelines for intravitreal injections have been developed. Performing intravitreal injections involves the following steps:
1. Establishing an accurate diagnosis and developing a treatment plan; including obtaining informed patient consent.
## Injection Risks
For the injection, in-depth knowledge of the surgical anatomy of the eye is essential to avoid complications. The needle should be inserted perpendicularly through the sclera with the tip aimed toward the center of the globe to avoid the posterior lens. Injections are generally performed inferotemporally or superotemporally to optimize exposure and to avoid damage to the retina and other eye structures. For example, the lens capsule can become damaged during the injection and a traumatic cataract can result, requiring subsequent cataract surgery. This may also lead to complications during cataract surgery caused by posterior capsule rupture. The retina may also be damaged, resulting in tears or even a detachment that requires surgical repair. Other possible iatrogenic injuries can include corneal abrasions and intraocular hemorrhages.
During the injection procedure, IOP can increase transiently, and the ophthalmologist may need to reduce IOP. This may require an anterior chamber paracentesis. In this procedure, the surgeon must insert a needle into the anterior chamber of the eye to remove fluid and reduce the pressure. This procedure carries many of the same risks as the first injection (cataract, endophthalmitis, etc.).
## Post-Injection Risks
Intravitreal injections of various agents have been studied extensively, and the overall risk of complications is low in the hands of experienced ophthalmologists. However, known post-injection risks of intravitreal injections can be vision-threatening and require prompt diagnosis, treatment, and possibly surgical intervention. The most serious but rarely occurring injection-related complications include: acute-onset endophthalmitis, intraocular inflammation or pseudo-endophthalmitis, cataract development/progression, retinal detachment, hemorrhage, and sustained elevated IOP. Additional infrequent complications include: hypotony, angle closure, retinal vein occlusions, retinal pigment epithelial tears, iritis/uveitis, anterior ischemic optic neuropathy, corneal epitheliopathy or abrasion, maculopathy, retinal vasculitis, and allergic or anaphylactic reactions. After intravitreal injections, patients must be instructed to promptly report any symptoms of pain, worsening redness, reduced vision, increased sensitivity to light, or increased floaters, which may indicate endophthalmitis.
A Cochrane meta-analysis of the literature on anti-VEGF injections for neovascular AMD through January 2018 found a rate of endophthalmitis of less than 1%. Another meta-analysis ...
## Systemic Complications
In addition, when certain agents such as anti-VEGF medications and corticosteroids are given systemically, they can have significant and potentially life-threatening complications. The potential systemic side effects of anti-VEGF agents include thromboembolic events, such as stroke, myocardial infarction, and angina, and other complications, such as gastrointestinal perforation, hemorrhage, hypertensive crisis, congestive heart failure, and neutropenic sepsis. Although all intravitreal anti-VEGF treatments may carry theoretical risks for systemic arterial thromboembolic events, the results of clinical trials studying these risks remain inconclusive. A 2021 systematic review and meta-analysis concluded that intravitreal anti-VEGF therapies did not increase the risk of major cardiovascular events, but there were increased nonocular hemorrhages in patients with AMD. Additional meta-analyses found that anti-VEGF therapies and treatment intensity did not have an effect on mortality. However, due to low certainty evidence, estimates of mortality were noted to be imprecise. Ophthalmologists need to monitor the patient for the possibility of long-term systemic side effects.
Ophthalmologists are doctors of medicine or osteopathy who have completed a one-year internship in medicine or surgery, a three-year residency in ophthalmology, and in many cases, a one- or two-year fellowship. They have received at least three years of advanced training during which they observe and/or perform dozens of injections. The scope of this training provides licensed ophthalmologists with a level of experience, especially with treatment of unforeseen adverse complications, that is substantially higher than other clinicians. Moreover, should a complication occur with an injection, timeliness of access to medical treatment is essential to the visual outcome. Licensed ophthalmologists are more likely to be performing injections in facilities equipped to respond to complications immediately, thus enhancing patient safety.
## Summary
## Approvals
American Academy of Ophthalmology
Board of Trustees, November 7, 2008
Revised and Approved by:
American Academy of Ophthalmology
Board of Trustees, February 8, 2025